Introduction Social inequality and injustice are based on group memberships, like gender, race/ethnicity, and class. For example, women and gender minorities experience workplace discrimination, and restrictive gender roles affect people of all genders in intimate relationships. Similarly, racism harms people’s health and healthcare access, and racial/ethnic minorities experience workplace discrimination. People from lower socioeconomic backgrounds face exclusion in settings including housing, health care, and education. These issues are typically examined along individual dimensions of gender, race/ethnicity, or class. This monolithic approach, however, risks overlooking how these dimensions interact in shaping social realities. For instance, social psychologists have begun to consider intersections between race/ethnicity and gender, for example gender-race-stereotypes, to better understand complex discrimination patterns, like backlash against female leaders of different races. Despite this progress, the intersection of social class and gender has received comparatively less attention. The present article contributes to filling this gap by examining the interplay of social class and gender, two key dimensions of social inequality. To develop our hypotheses, we first review existing research on social class and then turn to intersections of class and social status with gender. Social class and (socioeconomic) status In recent years, researchers have advanced conceptualizations and empirical studies of social class and socioeconomic status. Both class and social or socioeconomic status (SES) describe how individuals and groups are positioned in a social context and, as a result of their position, have different degrees of access to economic, social, and cultural resources. Definitions of class and status vary; class has traditionally been defined based on labor relations in which ownership and control of productive assets enables some groups and individuals to exert control over others and exploit their surplus labor. However, class has also been analyzed as a form of culture, with individuals learning distinct norms and values through socialization in their class environments. Social status, on the other hand, has been used to describe an individual’s or group’s relative social position more broadly as the value or importance assigned to them based on stratifying group memberships and characteristics, such as race/ethnicity, gender, or skills, including characteristics that are also associated with class position, such as occupation. Some theories posit status as purely symbolic, others define it as a symbolic yet inextricable aspect of class. Socioeconomic status represents social and economic circumstances of an individual or group and their relative position, drawing on a variety of indicators commonly including occupation, income, and education. We acknowledge that definitions of social class and (socioeconomic) status are contested and vary across disciplines and theoretical frameworks. Depending on the specific definition, our variables of interest – occupation, income, and education -, could to varying degrees serve as indicators of both status and class. We therefore use the terms “status”, “SES”, and “class” interchangeably in this manuscript, rather than prescribing a specific mapping of occupation, income, and education to class, SES, and/or status according to one specific definition of these constructs. However, as outlined above, these concepts are not necessarily equivalent and there can be valid reasons for further differentiation depending on theoretical framework and research questions. Across different conceptualizations of social inequality, there is ample evidence of its manifestation in and impact on individuals, groups, and societies. Poor people are disadvantaged in multiple domains like housing, health care, and education. Class influences health and well-being. It shapes social perception and behavior. Importantly, high class is not simply the absence of low-class disadvantages, but distinctively shapes cognition, behavior, and perception by others. Many people across cultures hold ambivalent warmth and competence stereotypes about rich and poor individuals. Access to resources associated with class is often operationalized through socioeconomic markers like education, income, and occupation. However, these markers correlate only moderately, and predict different outcomes. For instance, income is associated with current access to economic resources, preferences for self-sufficiency, and political attitudes opposing economic redistribution. Education, on the other hand, is linked to cultural capital, prestige, trust and political interest, and liberal political attitudes. Occupations differ in perceived social status, and people commonly build social connections and friendships with others who work in a similar sector and/or occupation with similar status. Similarly, a person’s income, education, and occupation may each uniquely influence how others perceive them. For example, someone’s occupation impacts how others perceive them, depending on general stereotypes about the occupational group – people tend to assume that someone working in a prestigious occupation would be assertive and competent. Capturing the nuances of each SES marker independently enables a deeper understanding of the relationships between SES and various outcomes. Intersection of gender and class Whereas there is an extensive literature on gender and social class, respectively, the intersection of gender and class remains underexplored. Investigating the intersection of social class and gender is crucial both regarding how perceivers judge targets with various combinations of gender and class, which may result in stereotyping and discrimination, as well as how targets are treated, i.e., the resulting positive or negative psychological experiences from social interactions. Whereas the primary focus of this research is on perceiver effects (i.e., impression formation), these two aspects are connected, as social judgments may give rise to experiences of discrimination. Gender is linked to status beliefs – with men generally expected to have higher status than women. Status is central to agentic masculine stereotypes and role expectations, as opposed to communal feminine stereotypes and roles. Men are expected to embody traits that are associated with high status, like agency and independence, and avoid displaying traits associated with low status, like weakness and shyness. Women are not necessarily expected to embody traits signaling low status, but to avoid displaying traits associated with high status. Existing research on intersections of gender and status is predominantly based in organizational contexts, where people often perceive women as unfit for leadership positions associated with traditionally masculine traits. Perceivers respond negatively to women who violate role expectations by occupying or striving for high-status positions, especially when this includes exhibiting dominant behaviors. Similarly, people judge men more negatively who violate role expectations by behaving modestly or being stay-at-home fathers, while working mothers are likewise judged more negatively than stay-at-home mothers. Performance evaluations often apply shifting standards based on group memberships and associated stereotype-based expectations. Women, stereotyped as less competent than men, have lower thresholds to meet minimum competence standards (i.e., the minimum ability needed to perform a skill) in stereotypically masculine skills, but higher thresholds to be considered excellent. When in a leadership position, women are perceived as less legitimate than men and are subject to double standards that penalize them for showing dominant emotions like anger or pride, which are deemed acceptable in men. This may also apply to class and status standards, with low-income women potentially evaluated more positively than low-income men, and high-income men more positively than high-income women. Fig 1 visualizes the shifting standards model. The precarious manhood hypothesis highlights the fragile nature of masculinity, where a man’s status as “manly” is not a given but something that must be continually earned and is easily lost or taken away in the eyes of others. This concept intersects with social class, illustrating how the pressure to uphold masculine ideals is particularly intense among men facing status threats. The link between masculinity and social power means that when a man loses economic or occupational status, it can also be perceived as a loss of masculinity. Therefore, men might be more affected by status threats compared to women, fearing and facing social judgment for failing to conform to masculine role expectations. This intersection underscores the complexity of how gender and class dynamics shape individual experiences and social attitudes, as in men who are judged harshly when they fail to conform to traditional masculine roles, such as being the primary breadwinner. The subordinate male target hypothesis (SMTH) suggests that direct intergroup hostility is mainly directed towards men of subordinate groups. Therefore, lower-class men might face more negative judgment than women. Intersectional invisibility theory posits that individuals with multiple subordinate identities, such as working-class women, are non-prototypical for each of their overlapping groups and may experience distinct disadvantages. This invisibility can shield them from direct discrimination but also results in a lack of representation and influence. In line with both SMTH and intersectional invisibility, lower-class men report more direct discrimination experiences than women. Poor men are also stereotyped more negatively and blamed more for their poverty than women. However, multiply marginalized women also face distinct disadvantages – for example, working-class women face more victim-blaming after gender-based mistreatment than middle-class women. In summary, compared to research on social status and gender in organizations, e.g., regarding leadership or performance, social judgments of women and men of different class backgrounds remain understudied. The aforementioned frameworks from the organizational and intergroup literature led us to suggest, however, that social class and gender may intersect much more dynamically than typically assumed. These intersectional dynamics are essential to a more comprehensive understanding of social stratification and its effects on individuals’ lives. Table 1 summarizes the theoretical frameworks discussed so far and expected outcomes for women and men at different class positions based on each framework. Gender and class in cultural context The intersection of gender and class also needs to be viewed in a cultural context: Power structures around class and gender and associated social norms are embedded in the respective culture, shaping stereotypes and attitudes. For example, gender stereotype content varies depending on cultural values, with men being stereotyped closer to the respective cultural ideal. Stereotypes can also change over time in the same cultural context, reflecting shifts in social roles, which interact with cultural beliefs about gender. While there is less cross-cultural research on perceptions of class, experimentally manipulated context inequality has been shown to heighten class stereotypes. The way education and income influence one’s social status and personal identity can also differ based on cultural norms and values suggesting that perceptions of both gender and class vary by context. Cultural narratives around social mobility and status can influence how individuals from different classes are perceived, which may also interact with their gender. Additionally, research suggests that precarious manhood beliefs are uniquely associated with patriarchal social structures at the country level. In countries where men have significantly more political power, control over resources, and better health outcomes than women, the perception that manhood must be earned and is easily lost is more prevalent. In conclusion, there is considerable evidence to suggest that the intersectional influence of gender and social class on judgments of others can be influenced by the cultural context in which these judgments are made. The present research This paper investigates how people evaluate others based on gender and class intersections, exploring also cultural (i.e., country-level) differences and potential explanatory variables. In a factorial survey experiment, we manipulated social dimensions, including class markers (education, income, occupation) and gender (women, men). This approach allows us to examine class markers separately, since they do not correlate perfectly and predict different outcomes. We examined participants’ attitudes towards vignette targets depending on gender, education, job, and income across eight countries to improve generalizability and explore the role of context. We hypothesized that higher status would predict more positive attitudes for men more strongly than for women, since status-associated agentic qualities are more important for men’s role expectations. In line with intersectional invisibility and SMTH, we expected low-status men to face more negative attitudes compared to low-status women. According to shifting standards theory, we also expected low-status women to be more positively evaluated than low-status men, and high-status men to be more positively evaluated than high-status women. The main analysis was preregistered on Originally, we planned to examine both overall attitude score and the dimensions of respect and liking separately. We only focus on the overall attitude as an outcome in this paper, but report the results for the two dimensions separately in supplementary materials available on OSF. This approach was supported by high correlations between attitude items (.69 −.85), implying that a combined analysis would still adequately reflect participants’ attitudes. See supplementary material for separate analyses for liking and respect. Results were mostly the same regarding our hypotheses. Where there were differences between liking and respect, this will be noted in the results. Additionally, we explored if country context moderates these relationships, focusing on country-level gender norms, gender inequality, and general inequality. This comprehensive approach aims to fill the gap in understanding how gender and class intersections influence interpersonal attitudes across different cultural contexts. Methods All materials, including supplementary materials, data, and code are available on OSF: Participants We included 2,714 participants (Nobs = 26,887) from eight studies in eight countries: Germany (N = 301, Nobs = 3,003), UK (N = 301, Nobs = 2,998), US (N = 307, Nobs = 3,040), Russia (N = 524, Nobs = 5,036), Australia (N = 359, Nobs = 3,590), Armenia (N = 311, Nobs = 3110), Brazil (N = 282, Nobs = 2,820), and India (N = 329, Nobs = 3,290). Sample sizes were based on recommendations for multilevel models. The data from Russia were originally collected by one of the authors in 2015 and the data from Australia, Armenia, Brazil, and India by the same author in 2017 to test different hypotheses. The anonymized datasets are available on OSF and were accessed on November 29 (Russian sample) and December 5 (remaining samples), 2022. These four countries were originally selected to represent different configurations of extreme scores on social inequality and acceptance of cultural diversity (ACD) based on data from the World Values Survey, wave 6 and the Human Development Report 2015, with Australia representing relatively low inequality and high ACD, Armenia representing low inequality and low ACD, Brazil representing high inequality and high ACD, and India representing high inequality and low ACD. For more details on country selection, see. We collected the data from Germany, UK, and US between March 31 and September 12, 2022 for a new project which the current paper is a part of. We ensured each sample included members of all social groups represented in the vignettes. S1 Table shows sample demographics. Fifteen participants under 18 years old were excluded from the Russian sample, and two participants due to technical errors. We excluded no other participants. Design and procedure All studies employ factorial survey designs, which combine experimental flexibility, high external validity, and low social desirability effects. Factorial surveys have been used to examine interpersonal attitudes and prejudice. Participants were randomly assigned to one of several blocks with 10 vignettes each. The total number of blocks in the US, UK, and Germany was six, in Armenia, Australia, Brazil, and India three, and in Russia, ten. Vignettes described people whose characteristics systematically varied on eight to nine social dimensions, depending on country, across two to six levels, depending on the dimension. In the two original studies, the authors selected dimension levels considering functional equivalence across countries, supported by interviews with local experts on intergroup relations. 8–11 social scientists with regional intergroup expertise from each country participated in semi-structured online questionnaires to determine which dimensions of social categorization were most salient in their respective countries. They were asked about the perceived importance of several preselected dimensions, and any important dimensions the researchers had not mentioned. In the US, UK, and Germany, we used the same levels across countries for income and job due to cultural similarity. In the previous cross-cultural study (Armenia, Australia, Brazil, India), authors chose categories that, based on expert interviews, were functionally equivalent, but varied in wording (e.g., low-skilled worker in Brazil vs. tradesperson in Australia). The Russian study used levels capturing salient social categories in Russia. For example, since most Russians have tertiary degrees, they are a weaker status marker than in countries where tertiary education is less common. Therefore, the authors used PhD as highest education level in Russia. Job levels were low-skilled worker, skilled professional, and highly skilled specialist. We combined the latter two into a “professional” level. Since unemployment was not included in Russia, there were only two job levels. Despite identifying functionally equivalent levels across countries, potential differences in perception of levels should be kept in mind when interpreting the results. Table 2 shows specific dimensions per country and their levels. In the US/UK/Germany, we manipulated nine dimensions: gender, migration background, political attitude, sexual orientation (2 levels each), income, job, religion, ethnicity, and age (3 levels each). The factorial design was created using SAS. From the vignette universe (all possible combinations of variable levels, n = 3,888), we sampled n = 60 vignettes for a D-efficient fractionalized design. The D-efficiency coefficient, which indicates design strength (balance and dimension orthogonality), was 92.5 (standard prediction error 0.89) – sufficient power to detect effects of dimensions on attitude. The vignette sample was split into 6 blocks of 10 to prevent participant fatigue. Fig 2 shows an example stimulus from the UK/US, highlighting the nine manipulated dimensions. In the US, UK, and Germany, we did not exclude any vignettes that participants might perceive as implausible. However, in the remaining countries, some implausible combinations (e.g., being a professional and poor in Brazil) were excluded before creating a design with the remaining vignettes. Excluding implausible combinations from a factorial design necessarily reduces the design efficiency, and one of the strengths of these designs which is the examination of all potential combinations of dimensions to better understand each dimension’s specific impact. On the other hand, implausible vignettes may influence participants’ answering behavior in unwanted ways. For example, participants may either stop paying attention to the dimensions causing the implausibility – when confronted with an unemployed person with high income, they may base their reaction solely on the other factors than income and occupation that are not as conflicting. Or instead, they may overly focus on the conflicting dimensions of income and occupation in an effort to make sense of them. However, when comparing the impact of each dimension on attitudes between the waves of data collection where implausible combinations were or were not excluded, implausible vignettes did not eliminate or drastically increase the effects of the dimensions involved. This suggests that implausible combinations were not frequent or extreme enough to invalidate participants’ responses. This paper focuses on gender, job, income (manipulated in 7 out of 8 countries), and education (in 5 out of 8 countries). Job, income, and education are related, but not perfectly correlated, and predict different outcomes. Including all three allows to differentiate dimension-specific effects. Education and job levels represent specific demographic categories, e.g., college education, while income represents relative status. Thus, our design covers both aspects of class. Each level of each dimension occurred balanced across other levels and dimensions. This orthogonality allows to only analyze a subset of dimensions without bias when excluding others. It also allows to disentangle effects of dimensions that are often confounded in real-world contexts, as is the case with status markers like education and occupational status, as well as other characteristics linked to socioeconomic stratification, such as gender and race/ethnicity. By explicitly providing information about important social dimensions, and manipulating them independently from one another, we can greatly reduce the confounding effects that usually exist between these group memberships due to their factual and assumed correlations. For example, the explicit information about ethnicity in the vignettes ensured that participants would not imagine the person in the vignette as belonging to an ethnic group that they implicitly associated with a given socioeconomic status. The US, UK, and Germany questionnaires also included measures of social group perception, identification, perceived discrimination, and mental health (see OSF for details). Participants evaluated the vignettes first, so vignette ratings were unaffected by other measures. Design details and additional measures included in the earlier studies are presented in the respective publications. Participants gave written informed consent before participating in the study. Each study complied with the respective university’s ethical guidelines, which waived ethics review for the studies conducted in Russia (Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia), and Armenia, Australia, Brazil, and India (Jacobs University Bremen, Germany). Data collection in the UK, US, and Germany was approved by the ethics committee of the faculty of psychology at Ruhr University Bochum, Germany. Data were collected via the survey platform Qualtrics in Russia, Germany, UK, and US, and via Unipark in Australia, Armenia, Brazil, and India. Participants were recruited online via recruitment platform Prolific, survey companies MSI (Germany) and Lightspeed (Australia, Brazil, India), the Turpanjian Center for Policy Analysis (Armenia), and social media and ethnic Diaspora online forums (Russia). We chose recruitment avenues based on availability in each country. In Germany, where it proved difficult to reach a balanced sample composition regarding our demographic criteria specified before via Prolific alone, we enlisted the survey company to specifically recruit participant groups underrepresented in the Prolific sample. For some hard-to-reach minority groups in Armenia and India, the survey was conducted as a computer-assisted interview instead. Participants in all countries except Russia and Armenia received monetary compensation via the respective panel providers. Measures Attitude. In Russia, attitude was measured with two items on a 10-point scale from 1 - “not at all” to 10 - “very much”: one social distance item “Would you like this person to be your neighbor?” and one likability item “Do you like this person?”. Spearman-Brown consistency was.92. In Australia, Armenia, Brazil, and India, attitude was measured with three items on a six-point scale from 1 – “not at all” to 7 – “very much”: “I like/respect/want to engage with this person.” (likability/respect/social distance, respectively). Cronbach’s α was.81−.92. In Germany, UK, and US, we used the same items, but a six-point scale. Cronbach’s α was.87−.92. Measures were z-standardized before combining them into a single measure (min: −2.29, max: 1.92). Country-level variables. All country-level data were drawn from the United Nations Development Programme’s (UNDP) Human Development Report 2021−22. All country-level variables were z-standardized for the analysis. We used the Gender Social Norms Index (GSNI; as an indicator of country-level gender norms. The GSNI consists of seven items from the World Values Survey, asking about gender bias on four dimensions: political (e.g., “Men make better political leaders than women do”), educational (e.g., “University is more important for a man than for a woman”), economic (“Men should have more right to a job than women”), and physical integrity (e.g., “Justifiable - For a man to beat his wife”). The GSNI is based on the latest available WVS data for each country as of the Human Development Report 2021–22, Data from India stemmed from wave 6 of the WVS (2010–2014), while data from the remaining countries stemmed from wave 7 (2017–2022). The GSNI indicates for each dimension which percentage of the population agrees with any of the biased statements. We calculated the mean across dimensions. We used the Gender Inequality Index (GII; to represent gender inequality. It includes inequality indicators on three dimensions: reproductive health (maternal mortality, adolescent births), labor market (women’s participation in paid labor), and empowerment (women’s parliamentary representation and secondary education). The GII is based on data up to 2021, including maternal mortality ratios in 2017, and adolescent birth rates, share of seats held by women in parliament, as well as differences in secondary education and labour force participation rates by gender, all in 2021. For general social inequality, we used the Inequality in income and Inequality in education measures, based on the Atkinson inequality index. The Atkinson inequality index ranges from 0 to 1 and is calculated as A = ε – g/μ, where ε is an inequality aversion parameter that determines the sensitivity to changes at the lower end of the distribution. The UNDP uses ε = 1. g is the geometric mean, μ the arithmetic mean of the distribution. Inequality of income is based on disposable household incomes, inequality of education on years of schooling, compiled and harmonized in international databases, such as the World Bank’s International Income Distribution Database. A detailed description of the data sources is available in the UNDP’s technical notes on the Human Development Report 2021/22. We used the sum of income and education inequality scores as a general inequality score for each country. Higher values on the inequality indices reflect higher inequality. Analytical strategy Analyses were conducted in R 4.1.2 in the RStudio environment. Packages used for data preparation were haven, psych, readxl, tidyverse. For analysis, we also used lmerTest, lme4, and for visualization patchwork, scales and sjPlot. The independent variables are target’ gender, income, education, and job, and country-level gender norms, gender inequality, and social inequality. The dependent variable is attitude towards the target. Vignettes are nested within respondents, and respondents within countries, so we used multilevel regression. Individual-level variance of attitude (intraclass correlation, i.e., the ratio of the variance between participants to the total variance, or the correlation among vignette ratings of the same participant) ranged from.33 to.64, meaning that 33–64% of the variance could be attributed to differences in participants’ average attitudes. We ran multilevel regressions for each dimension (education, job, income), using dummy coding with the middle level as reference to examine both effects of lower-than-average and higher-than-average status. Thus, we compared both low and high education levels to average education level, both unemployment and professional job to manual job, and both below-average and above-average to average income. Each model predicted attitude by the respective social class dimension and gender, and their interaction. Afterwards, we examined the effect of each country-level variable, respectively (GSNI, GII, inequality). We first added the respective country-level variable and two-level interactions with gender and the respective status dimension. Then, we added the three-level interaction between the respective dimension, gender, and the country-level variable. We ran a number of robustness checks, the results of which are reported in the supplement. We tested whether the effects of interest were robust regardless of the year of data collection, the difference in attitude measures between Russia vs. the rest of the countries, the difference how income was operationalized in different countries (“rich” vs. “poor”, or “above average” vs. “below average”, respectively), participants’ own education and occupational status (as highly educated professionals were overrepresented in the samples), and whether effects of income were robust across occupation levels. The effects of interest were largely consistent across robustness checks, with only minor deviations when controlling for participant demographics and controlling for occupation level in income effects. Given the small number of countries (five to eight depending on the dimension), we ran simulations with R package simr to determine power to detect cross-level interactions. The model formula for education and gender norms, for example, was attitude ~ education* gender*GSNI + (1|participant) + (1|country). For education, we have 93% power to detect a small interaction of 0.10 with gender norms, 95% with gender inequality, and 98% with general inequality. For income, we have 93% power for gender norms, 98% for gender inequality, and 98% for general inequality. For job, we have 97% power for gender norms, 98% for gender inequality, and 98% for general inequality. Results General findings S2 Table shows mean attitude ratings by country at each level of job, income, and education, respectively. 17.7% of variance in attitude was on the country level. Single-term deletion showed significant random slopes between countries for the interactions between gender and income (σ² =.089, p <.001), job (σ² =.081, p <.001), and education (σ² =.128, p <.001). Education High education predicted more and low education less positive attitude than intermediate education. High education influenced attitudes towards men (vs. women) less positively. Table 3 shows regression results, Fig 3A visualizes the results. In countries with more conservative gender norms, this gendered pattern was strengthened – high education influenced attitudes towards men less positively, and low education influenced attitudes towards men more negatively (about as negatively as it did for women). The education effect was mainly driven by the liking dimension of attitude, since when analyzing respect separately, it was no longer significant. See S3 Table for regression results. See Fig 4A for an interaction plot. Similarly, in countries with high gender inequality, low education also had more negative impact on attitudes towards men. This effect was mostly driven by the respect dimension of attitude, since in a separate analysis of liking, it was only marginally significant. When analysing respect separately, there was also a positive three-way interaction with high education, indicating that high education had a more positive impact on respect towards men in countries with high gender inequality. See S6 Table for regression results. See Fig 5A for an interaction plot. In highly unequal countries, low education also influenced attitudes towards men more negatively, but high education influenced attitudes towards men more positively (though still overall less positively than attitudes towards women). See S9 Table for regression results. See Fig 6A for an interaction plot. Occupation Professional job predicted more and unemployment predicted less positive attitude than manual job. Unemployment had a more negative influence on attitudes towards men (vs. women). This was mostly driven by the respect dimension. When analyzing liking separately, there was no significant effect. See Table 4 for regression results and Fig 3B for a visualization. There was no significant three-way interaction between any of the country-level variables, gender, and occupation. See S4 Table for regression results, and Fig 4B for an interaction plot with gender norms; S7 Table and Fig 5B with gender inequality; S10 Table and Fig 6B with general inequality. Income High income predicted more positive attitude compared to average income. High income influenced attitudes towards men (vs. women) less positively, and low income influenced attitudes towards men (vs. women) more negatively. See Table 5 for regression results and Fig 3C for a visualization. In countries with high gender inequality, as well as high general inequality, high income had a more positive effect on attitudes towards men, and low income had a less negative effect on attitudes towards men. This effect was mostly driven by the liking dimension of attitude, since the interaction with low income was no longer significant when separately analysing respect, and the interaction with high income only marginally significant. Overall, however, high income still had less of a positive, and low income more of a negative effect, on attitudes towards men (vs. women). See S8 Table for regression results, and Fig 5C for an interaction plot with gender inequality, and S11 Table and Fig 6C with general inequality. There was no significant three-way interaction between gender norms, gender, and income. See S5 Table for regression results, and Fig 4C for interaction plots. Discussion We investigated how gender and class interact in perceptions of others in eight cultural contexts. Overall, participants rated targets with higher education, income, and occupation level more positively and those with lower education and occupation level more negatively. This aligns with people’s general preference for high social status, at least when status differences are perceived as stable and legitimate. However, participants did not prefer average-income over low-income targets. Poor people are often stereotyped as incompetent, thus they may be rated less positively. However, we systematically varied education and occupational status across income groups. When participants receive explicit information about low-income targets’ education and job, they may not stereotype them as generally incompetent. Besides, attitudes towards the poor and the rich varied between countries, with more positive attitudes towards the poor and more negative attitudes towards the rich in highly unequal countries. Indeed, social inequality predicted a less attitudes towards high-status targets. Countries were selected to cover a wide range of inequality levels, so differences between highly and less unequal countries may average to a null effect of low income. High income had a stronger positive effect on attitudes in women (vs. men), and unemployment and low income had a stronger negative effect in men (vs. women). However, high occupational status had a similar effect on attitudes towards women and men, as did low education. The finding that low status had more negative impact on attitudes towards men on two out of three dimensions mostly aligns with the Subordinate Male Target Hypothesis/SMTH, according to which men from marginalized groups, in this case low class, would face more direct negative consequences than women. Intersectional invisibility theory also states that more prototypical members of marginalized groups – in this case, men – would encounter more active oppression than less prototypical members – in this case, women. Importantly, women from lower socioeconomic class backgrounds may in turn encounter distinct disadvantages related to invisibility, such as lack of support in the face of gender-based mistreatment and sexual violence The finding also aligns with shifting standards theory, according to which minimum performance standards for women would be lower in stereotypically masculine areas like career, and thus low status on these dimensions would be penalized less in women. The finding could also show a backlash effect against men who violate gender norms when failing to fulfill the provider role. This aligns with findings showing stricter prescriptive gender norms for men vs. women and more negative stereotypes about poor men vs. women. However, the lack of interaction effect with gender for education implies these theories may not hold for all status markers. Since girls/women often outperform boys/men regarding educational achievement and educational effort is stereotypically associated with femininity, education standards for women may be higher compared to income and occupation. Since more material aspects of status like income are associated with masculine roles, education may be relatively more important in the evaluation of women. The finding that contrary to our predictions, high status had a more positive effect on attitudes towards women (vs. men) on two out of three dimensions aligns with shifting standards theory – women may be assumed to be especially competent when they manage to reach high status, since participants may be aware that the hurdle for them to be considered exceptionally competent could be higher compared to men, as well as the necessary effort to reach the same occupational status and income as men, considering persistent gender discrimination in the workplace, and gender pay gaps. Conversely, we find no evidence for a backlash effect against women in high-status positions. However, backlash effects have mostly been researched regarding organizational leadership, not necessarily more abstract social hierarchies, which may explain the lack of alignment. The labels we used in most countries suggested relatively mild status hierarchies, e.g., someone with above average income instead of a rich person; the latter may elicit stronger backlash. The finding also reflects no overall higher importance of status dimensions for attitudes towards men compared to women, contrary to what we expected based on traditional masculine stereotypes in which competence is central. Preference patterns regarding gender or status, and their interaction, varied between countries. Conservative gender norms strengthened the general pattern that high status had less positive impact on attitudes towards men (vs. women). Conservative gender roles include a higher gender asymmetry where men are breadwinners in the public sphere, whereas women are responsible for the household, so status expectations for men should be higher in these contexts. In addition to normative expectation, conservative gender roles also correlate with gender inequality. Participants may therefore consider gendered differences in opportunities in these contexts and adjust their attitudes towards women and men of different status depending on the assumed difficulty to reach high status depending on gender. High education influenced attitudes towards men less positively, and low education influenced their attitudes more negatively, when gender norms were more conservative, while gender norms did not interact with gender and job or income. This may be because men are penalized more for low income and job than women even in less conservative contexts, while that is less the case for education. Participants may also adjust their attitudes based on assumed gender differences in educational opportunities. Since conservative gender norms correlate with gender inequality, women may have less access to education in gender-conservative countries. Thus, participants may expect men to achieve higher education than women by default, and perceive them more negatively when they fail to do so. Regarding general inequality, high education and high income influenced attitudes towards men more positively when inequality was high. This could reflect the higher importance of status in more unequal societies. Interestingly, unemployment and low income influenced attitudes towards men less negatively in highly unequal contexts, potentially reflecting participants’ awareness of low class mobility. In countries with high gender inequality, high income had more positive and low income less negative impact on attitudes towards men. Gender inequality correlates with gender norms and general inequality, so this result may be explained by the previously suggested higher relevance of income in generally unequal contexts, especially for men who are expected to be providers when gender norms are conservative, while also accounting for low class mobility in highly inequal countries when evaluating low-income individuals. The pattern of results was similar for overall attitude as for the specific dimensions liking and respect, but there were some nuanced differences. Gender differences in the impact of unemployment on attitude were mostly driven by respect, with unemployment impacting respect towards men more negatively than towards women. Regarding three-level interactions with gender inequality on the country level, the stronger impact of education on attitudes towards men in countries with high gender inequality was also driven by the respect dimension. The stronger positive effect of high income and weaker negative effect of low income on attitudes towards men in countries with high gender inequality on the other hand was mostly driven by the liking dimension. This could indicate that specific status markers predict some components of attitude more strongly than others, with education and occupation being more linked to respect, and income to liking. However, these findings are preliminary and need to be replicated in future studies. Class and gender interact shaping people’s experiences, perceptions, and judgments. Gender stereotypes and role expectations differ by class, the most prominent stereotypes and norms aligned with middle-class (White, heterosexual, etc.) women and men. Our results show bias against low-status or in favor of high-status others also varies by gender. How these patterns play out exactly depends on social hierarchies and gender norms in a specific cultural context. Among contextual factors, these effects can be influenced by gender role expectations, importance of status, assumed gender differences by opportunity, as well as assumed class mobility, among others. This aligns with causal attribution processes, specifically augmentation – for example, when contextual gender inequality would strongly suggest men to be more successful than women, there must be especially strong (likely negative, personal) explanations for a man who fails to be successful even under these circumstances. On the other hand, when contextual inequality and low social mobility suggests that some individuals would have little chance to reach high socioeconomic status no matter their efforts, people may be less likely to draw negative personal conclusions about these individuals, since their low status can be explained by the context. Strengths and limitations We compared the impact of gender, class, and their interactions on interpersonal attitudes across eight countries that differed in gender role norms and inequality. This helped ensure generalizability, and identify contextual moderators. Furthermore, stimulus material in each country included people of several races/ethnicities most present in the respective local context, so that the findings apply to targets from different racial backgrounds. Our samples were demographically diverse to represent all groups included in the vignettes, including different income groups, educational backgrounds, and occupational groups. While in most countries our samples were restricted to participants we could reach via online recruitment, we made sure that groups that might be generally underrepresented in online samples, e.g., older adults, were still included. However, we did not achieve a perfectly balanced representation of all target groups. Despite all of our samples including participants from different educational and occupational backgrounds, professionals with moderate to high education levels were relatively overrepresented. While robustness checks controlling for participant education and occupation showed little impact on the results, due to the relative underrepresentation of people with lower educational/occupational status, we may not have been able to detect effects of these participant group memberships that may emerge in samples with a more balanced representation of occupational/educational groups. There might also be additional factors specific to our mostly online participants who self-selected into the study instead of being recruited at random that might limit generalizability. The factorial survey design allowed to manipulate education, job, and income separately, while in real life, they are often intertwined – for example, professional jobs generally require higher educational qualifications. Thus, we were able to identify effects specific to each factor. However, we cannot be certain why the effects we observed occurred. Individuals may base their judgment on inferences about targets’ skills and personality that are more or less grounded in social realities and/or stereotypes – for example, if they are aware of an existing gender pay gap, they may assume that it is easier for men to reach a higher income than for women and conclude that a man with a low income must be especially incompetent. Judgments may also be influenced by perceived gender norm violation. However, we did not ask about participants’ perceptions of their social environments, nor how gender-role congruent they found the targets. Beyond the specific dimension of gender, individuals with a high (situational or chronic) need for certainty tend to evaluate non-stereotypical targets more negatively because they resist easy categorization. We did not observe an overall bias against non-stereotypical targets, as we did not observe a backlash in attitude against high-status women. Thus, our results are unlikely to stem from a general dislike of non-stereotypicality among participants. However, this mechanism might still play a role depending on participants’ personality, attitudes, and motivations, or strength and content of stereotypes about gender and class groups. Another open question is how actual social inequality interacts with people’s beliefs about inequality in shaping attitudes towards others based on gender and status. Subjective perception of inequality better predicts well-being than objective inequality markers. Meritocracy belief, just world belief, social dominance orientation, and neoliberal ideology are associated with prejudice and discrimination towards low-status groups, and opposition against efforts to reduce inequality, like affirmative action. The moderating effect of perceived inequality may be even stronger than that of objective inequality. Despite the consistent patterns observed, the effect sizes in our study were small. Several factors could account for this. First, the factorial survey design allowed us to manipulate multiple dimensions simultaneously, which, while beneficial for understanding nuanced interactions, can dilute the apparent strength of any single effect. Social judgment is a complex phenomenon with many contributing factors. In this paper, we focus on information about targets’ gender, education, income, and occupational status, as well as broad indicators of cultural gender norms and inequality. However, other factors like perceivers’ own group memberships and potential ingroup bias, goals, and situational context can also influence social perception and judgment. It is therefore unsurprising that the manipulated target characteristics only explain a small part of the variance in attitudes, and there is significant variation between participants. Even small effect sizes can be meaningful in social psychological research. In large populations, small effects can have substantial cumulative impacts over time. For example, slight biases in hiring decisions can lead to significant disparities in employment rates and career advancement for different gender and class groups. Furthermore, small effects might indicate subtle, yet pervasive, forms of bias that contribute to broader social inequalities. Recognizing and addressing these small biases can cumulatively lead to important social changes and inform policies aimed at reducing inequality. Implications Our findings show that dimensions of social status cannot be fully understood separately from gender, and vice versa. This highlights the importance of integrating intersectionality to accurately represent complex social structures of power and inequality. Our findings underscore the necessity of integrating intersectionality into social policy and intervention strategies. Addressing gender and class inequalities simultaneously can provide a more comprehensive approach to reducing social injustice. Policies should be tailored to consider how class and gender intersect to influence individual experiences and societal perceptions. Additionally, promoting gender equality in conservative cultures requires nuanced strategies that address both gender norms and economic disparities. By recognizing the interconnectedness of these social dimensions, policymakers and practitioners can develop more effective interventions to combat systemic inequalities and foster inclusive social environments. Finally, our findings add to previous research on the cost of traditional gender roles for men who fail to live up to them, which most do at some point. They underscore the link between male privileges and restrictive, precarious masculinity. Recognizing how gender inequalities come with a price for advantaged as well as disadvantaged groups could motivate men to get involved in fights for gender equality. Highlighting the intersectional constitution of gender and class inequalities also addresses a common reaction by advantaged group members when they are confronted with their group’s privilege – they may acknowledge that in general, men for example are privileged, but state that they personally have not benefitted (much) from these privileges. While in some cases, this may simply be an argument that advantaged group members use to avoid identity discomfort regardless of their actual experiences, it may also reflect real experiences of disadvantage on other identity dimensions. Understanding intersectional dynamics of class, gender, and further relevant social dimensions is important to accurately reflect complex experiences of (dis)advantage depending on each individual’s combination of group memberships and their impact in different contexts. Incorporating this understanding into interventions aimed at improving intergroup relations and reducing inequalities could be a promising avenue for future research to improve the effectiveness of these interventions and reduce unwanted effects like defending, denying, or distancing oneself from privilege when confronted. Conclusion We examined how gender and class (operationalized as education, income, and occupational status) intersect in influencing interpersonal attitudes. High education and income had a more positive impact on attitudes towards women (vs. men), and low income and occupation had a more negative impact on attitudes towards men. In gender-conservative countries, these gender differences were heightened – low educational status also had a more negative impact on attitudes towards men in these contexts. General social inequality also impacts status- and gender-based attitudes – people make weaker inferences about others based on social status and differentiate less by gender when inequality is high. These findings highlight how gender norms interact with gender and class in shaping interpersonal attitudes. More studies on the social psychology of class and classism should take gender into account, and vice versa. This will enrich the understanding of class- and gender-based discrimination and potentially stimulate new ideas for anti-bias interventions, specifically targeting gendered class bias. Introduction Interpersonal and institutional racism take an unconscionable toll on the mental health of Black Americans, and existing health disparities have been magnified by the strain of the COVID-19 pandemic and ongoing epidemics of police violence and public intimidation directed at Black Americans. Consequently, Black Americans’ mental health suffers at significantly greater rates than White Americans. Yet, despite greater harms to their mental health, people may paradoxically believe psychopathology harms Black Americans less than White Americans. People frequently believe that past hardships desensitize Black individuals to everyday social hurts. The current work tested whether racial biases in social pain judgments extend to beliefs about the harms of psychopathology. We predicted that when presented with identical mental illnesses (e.g., depression, anxiety, schizophrenia), participants would believe that psychopathology was less distressing to Black relative to White individuals. Moreover, we predicted that these distress biases would mediate effects on expected treatment needs. Four studies (two pre-registered) tested these hypotheses among the lay public (Studies 1-2b) and mental health professionals (MHPs; Studies 1,3). Race and distress Converging evidence supports the hypothesis that people will expect psychopathology to hurt Black individuals less than White individuals. First, evaluators often deny Black individuals complex emotions like grief, suffering, and mental anguish. Second, parallel research on the socio-emotional experiences of Black individuals finds that Black Americans regularly feel their social pains are invalidated and minimized. Third, research documents racial biases in pain judgments such that people regularly believe the same hurtful events (e.g., breaking a bone; being disrespected) harm Black individuals less than White individuals. As this work attests, racial biases frequently result in the minimization of Black individuals’ pain. These racial biases in pain judgments are multiply determined. Cross-race deficits in communication, facial processing, social accuracy, biological racism, and beliefs about the adversity and toughness of Black individuals have all been linked to biased judgments of physical pain. Like physical pain, racialized beliefs about hardship and toughness also bias judgments of social pain (i.e., distress and negative emotions related to hurtful experiences with others ). Subsequent research finds that factors associated with the activation of Black racial stereotypes (i.e., Black racial phenotypicality ) modulated these effects, such that individuals with more phenotypically Black features had their pain minimized to a greater degree than individuals with less phenotypically Black features. In both cases, racial biases in social pain were driven by beliefs about the toughness and adversity experienced by Black individuals. People believe Black individuals experienced considerable adversity and consequently were desensitized to everyday social pains. When viewed collectively, the above research provides consistent evidence for predicting that race will bias judgments of psychological distress, such that mental illness is believed to hurt Black individuals less than White individuals. Contribution of the current work The current work makes several contributions to research on pain, race, and mental health. First, these studies identify a racial bias in distress and treatment judgments relevant to the mental health crisis facing Black Americans. Over 400 years of racial violence and resultant social and economic inequality has produced sustained mental health disparities between Black and White Americans. Yet, precisely when Black Americans mental health needs are pressing, many in society may paradoxically believe that Black individuals are hurt less and have weaker treatment needs than White individuals. The current work stands to provide evidence for a social-cognitive bias that undermines judgments of the mental health needs of Black Americans. Second, the minimization of Black individuals’ psychological distress hints at a novel theoretical mechanism that may affect mental healthcare for Black clients. Heretofore, research on racial biases in mental health have focused on (mis)communication, trust, symptom interpretation, access to health services, and the role of prejudice in diagnosis and treatment. Racial biases in distress judgments complement this research and—because evaluations of distress are critical to every stage of mental healthcare —provide evidence for a bias with wide-ranging treatment implications. Finally, the current work stands to advance research on pain biases beyond judgments of common social hurts to beliefs about the nature of psychopathology and mental healthcare. Rather than being limited to discrete and moderate social stressors (e.g., disrespect, exclusion ), target race stands to bias judgments of chronic and extreme mental health conditions that shape the daily lives of countless Americans. Race-based biases in pain judgments extend to fundamental judgments of psychological distress and treatment needs. The current work Four studies tested whether people believe psychopathology harms Black individuals less than White individuals and whether biased distress judgments mediate racial biases in judgments of treatment needs. Study 1 paired images of Black and White individuals with ten mental illnesses and tested whether participants believed these illnesses would cause Black individuals less distress than White individuals. Study 1 also preliminarily tested whether MHPs (e.g., counselors, clinical psychologists, psychiatrists) showed similar racial biases in distress judgments. Study 2a-2b (pre-registered replication) tested whether racial biases in distress mediated effects on treatment judgments. Study 3 (pre-registered) tested whether racial biases in distress and treatment judgments extend to practicing MHPs. Study 1: Race-based bias in mental health distress judgments The current study’s primary goal was to test our main hypothesis related to racial biases in psychological distress judgments. To test this hypothesis, ten Black and ten White male targets from the Chicago Face Database (CFD ) were paired with ten forms of psychopathology. The CFD is a frequently used and well validated stimulus set of adult target individuals from a variety of racial and ethnic backgrounds. Using norming data associated with face stimuli, we identified Black and White target individuals whose racial identity was easily identifiable while holding constant other facial features that might affect distress judgments (e.g., dominance, attractiveness, baby-facedness). Thus, using normed CFD stimuli allowed us to manipulate target race without introducing confounds related to facial structure and morphology. Participants then judged the distress they believed each mental illness would cause these pictured individuals. We hypothesized that participants would expect psychopathology to harm Black individuals less than White individuals. The study’s secondary goal was to explore whether potential biases in psychological distress generalize to those working in the field of mental health. With this goal in mind, we included a demographic item that allowed professional Mental Healthcare Professionals (MHPs; e.g., counselors, clinical psychiatrists, psychiatrists) to self-identify. In light of evidence that implicit bias and stereotype endorsement is found among healthcare workers, there was good reason to predict racial biases in psychopathology judgments would extend to mental health professionals. Method Participants. Ethics approval was granted for this research by Miami University and Auburn University’s Internal Review Boards, respectively. Written consent was presented via computer. Using the effect of target race documented in Deska, Kunstman et al. (2020b) d =.52, an a priori power analysis with G*Power software (V3.1 ) suggested a sample size of 32 participants would provide 80% power (α =.05) for the primary hypothesis test with a paired-samples t-test. In anticipation of data loss and to provide a more robust test, we oversampled and collected data from 204 U.S. participants via the online research participation platform MTurk. MTurk is an internet-based participant service that allows researchers to connect with individuals interested in participating in social science research in exchange for payment to Amazon Marketplace. The identification of duplicate IP addresses resulted in 11 exclusions, leaving an analyzable sample of 196 (1% American Indian or Alaska Native; 7% Asian; 19% Black or African American; 3% Latina/o; 1% Multi-racial; White 66%; 34% female; 63% male; Mage = 33.83, SD = 10.30). Including excluded participants does not change the direction or magnitude of any effects reported in Studies 1-2b. Differences related to analyzing complete data for Study 3 are discussed below. Full sample analyses for each study are located in the supplemental online materials. At no time did researchers have access to information that would reveal participants’ identities. Sensitivity analyses indicated this sample provided power to detect minimum effects of d =.20. Data and materials for the complete work and pre-registration plans for Studies 2b and 3 can be located at ( Materials. Participants viewed images of ten Black and ten White male targets from the Chicago Face Database (CFD ). Black and White targets were equated on ratings of age, anger, attractiveness, baby-facedness, dominance, femininity, happiness, masculinity, racial prototypicality, sadness, surprise, threat, trustworthiness Frange = 0.01–2.28, prange = 0.92–0.14. Specific tests of CFD norming data are available in the online materials and via the OSF link above. Target individuals were paired with a ten-item measure assessing harm caused by ten forms of psychopathology: depression, social anxiety, arachnophobia, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), bipolar disorder, panic disorder, insomnia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and schizophrenia. Participants rated how much psychological distress the pictured individual would experience if they had each form of psychopathology. Ratings were made on a 1 (not painful) to 7 (extremely painful) Likert scale. Distress judgments were then averaged within targets and combined across racial categories. Target images and psychopathology items were randomized. Participants’ background in mental health was assessed with a single item embedded within demographic questions. Specifically, participants were asked (yes/no) whether they provide professional mental health services to others (e.g., as a psychiatrist, clinical psychologist, professional counselor). Sixty-one participants responded yes to this item, indicating they had experience providing professional mental health services. Procedure. After consenting, participants completed the twenty-trial distress judgments task in an independently randomized order. After completing demographic information, participants were thanked, debriefed, and compensated for their time. Results A paired-samples t-test assessed the primary hypothesis that participants would believe psychopathology harms Black individuals less than White individuals. As hypothesized, when paired with the same forms of psychopathology, Black target individuals were judged to experience less distress (M = 4.52, SD = 1.30) than White target individuals (M = 4.64, SD = 1.26), t(192) = -3.963, p <.001, 95% CI[-.19, -.064], d = 0.29. Since a meaningful subset of our 196 participants self-reported as MHPs (n = 61), this allowed us to perform an exploratory test whether responses were moderated by professional background. To investigate this hypothesis, we conducted a mixed-model ANOVA where background (MHP/lay public) was entered as a between-subjects factor and ratings of psychological distress for targets (Black/White) were entered as a within-subjects factor. Sensitivity analysis revealed this test had 80% power (α =.05) to detect small-to-medium effects (d =.40). Results of this analysis reproduced the previously described main effect of target race, F(1, 190) = 7.85, p =.006, =.060 and produced a main effect of background, such that MHPs expected target individuals to experience more distress (M = 5.00, SD = 1.17) than members of the public (M = 4.39, SD = 1.26). The interaction between participant background and target race was not significant, F(1, 190) =.36, p =.549, =.002. Discussion These results provide initial evidence that the public believes psychopathology harms Black individuals less than White individuals. Moreover, although clinicians expected target individuals to experience more distress than those in the lay public, racial bias in distress judgments were largely comparable between MHPs (d =.25) and the lay public (d =.30). Although these results should be interpreted with caution given the relatively small sample of MHPs, there is some preliminary evidence that racial biases in psychological distress may extend to those working in mental health. In Studies 2a-2b, we next tested whether racially-biased distress judgments mediated effects on judgments of treatment needs. Study 2a-2b: Biased distress judgments inform treatment recommendations Study 2a had two primary goals. First, we aimed to further test the central hypothesis that people believe psychopathology hurts Black individuals less than White individuals. Second, we aimed to build on the bias documented in Study 1 to test whether racial biases in distress inform judgments of treatment needs. To test this treatment hypothesis, we added items assessing how many sessions of therapy pictured individuals would need to cope with mental illness. We hypothesized that biases in distress would bias treatment recommendations, such that participants would believe Black target individuals needed less treatment than White target individuals. Study 2b served as a direct replication of Study 2a’s effects. Method Participants Study 2a. Using Study 1’s effect estimate (d =.51), a priori power analysis (80% power; α =.05), suggested a sample of 33 participants would be needed to test the study’s main hypothesis with a paired-samples t-test. We oversampled and collected data from an undergraduate student sample across a full academic term. This sampling strategy resulted in a sample of 198 participants. Of this sample, 29 participants failed at least one of the study’s two attention checks, yielding an analyzable sample of 167 (9% Asian; 2% Black or African American; 2% Latina/o; 5% Multi-racial; White 78%; 55% female; 43% male; 2% did not disclose their sex; Mage = 19.20, SD = 1.24). Sensitivity analysis indicated that with 80% power (α =.05) this sample could detect effects as small as d =.22. Participants 2b. As a pre-registered replication of Study 2a, we sought a minimum analyzable sample of 190 participants. Expecting incomplete responses and exclusion, we oversampled 278 participants from MTurk. Of this initial sample, 68 participants failed at least one of the study’s attention checks or produced a duplicate IP address (suggesting repeat participation), leaving an analyzable sample of 210 (1% American Indian or Alaska Native; 5% Asian; 29% Black or African American; 3% Latina/o; 2% Multi-racial; 59% White; 39% female; 61% male; 1% chose not to disclose their sex; Mage = 35.90, SD = 11.20). Sensitivity analysis performed on this sample indicated that the current study had 80% power (α =.05) to reliably detect effects as small as d =.19. Materials 2a and 2b. Participants completed the same distress task as participants in Study 1 with two noteworthy modifications. Participants were not asked about their experience providing professional mental healthcare. Participants also made treatment judgments for each mental health item. For example, following distress judgments of depression, participants were asked, “How many sessions of therapy do you believe this person would need to effectively cope with depression?” Participants made judgments on a 1 (0 sessions) to 27 (26+ sessions) Likert scale. Judgments of pain and treatment were averaged across targets and racial categories. Procedure. Following consent, participants completed the twenty-trial distress and treatment task. Trial order and psychopathology items were randomized. Participants then completed demographic information, were debriefed, and compensated for their time. Results 2a Paired samples t-tests were performed to compare judgments of Black and White targets’ psychological distress and treatment needs. Participants again judged Black targets (M = 4.14, SD = 1.04) to feel less psychological distress than White targets (M = 4.32, SD =.93), t(166) = -6.38, p <.001, 95% CI[-.24, -.12], d =.49. Participants also believed that compared to White targets (M = 12.03, SD = 4.71), Black targets (M = 11.23, SD = 4.92) would need less treatment to manage their mental health, t(166) = -8.26, p <.001, 95% CI[-.99, -.61], d = 0.64. Using the MEMORE macro to test within-subjects mediation, we tested whether race’s effect on treatment judgments was mediated by judgments of psychological distress (Fig 1). Results indicated the effect of target race on treatment judgments was mediated by racial biases in distress judgments, b = -.32, SE =.11, 95% CI[-.55, -.13]. Results 2b Paired-samples t-tested compared judgments of distress and treatment for Black and White targets. Participants again judged Black targets (M = 4.47; SD = 1.06) to experience less distress than White targets (M = 4.54; SD = 1.04), t(209) = -2.59, p =.01, 95% CI[-.12, -.02] d = 0.18, and expected Black targets (M = 10.87; SD = 5.06) to need fewer treatment resources than White targets (M = 11.18; SD = 5.19), t(209) = -3.18, p =.002, 95% CI[-.50, -.12] d = 0.22 (Fig 2). We next tested whether judgments of psychological distress mediated race’s effect on treatment judgments. Results indicated that target race’s effect on treatment judgments was mediated by racial biases in psychological distress, b = -.19, SE =.07, 95% CI[-.34, -.05]. Participants believed Black targets would experience less psychological distress and consequently require fewer treatment resources than White targets. Discussion 2a-2b Participants believed Black individuals would experience less distress and need less psychological treatment than White individuals. Moreover, biases in distress mediated biased treatment judgments. Together, these results provide additional evidence for racial biases in beliefs about psychopathology and illustrate that these biases contaminate judgments of treatment needs. Participants believed that psychopathology harmed Black individuals less than White individuals and subsequently believed Black individuals needed less treatment relative to White individuals. Study 3 next tested whether racially-biased distress judgments extend to clinicians and mediate effects on treatment recommendations among practicing clinicians. Study 3: Tests among mental healthcare professionals Having provided consistent evidence of racial biases in judgments of psychological distress and treatment needs among the public, the current study tested whether these effects generalized—or were moderated—by experience in the field of mental healthcare. Consequently, we collected data from mental health professionals (MHPs) and members of the lay public. In light of preliminary evidence that MHPs showed smaller-but-comparable racial biases in psychological distress as laypeople (Study 1), there was reason to suspect similar biases in treatment judgments, such that Black target individuals would be judged to need less treatment than White target individuals. To test these hypotheses, laypeople and MHPs completed the distress and treatment task from Studies 2a-b. Method Participants. We recruited 160 mental healthcare professionals and 258 members of the general public. The size of the mental health professional portion of our sample was the largest possible given the resource costs needed to compensate this highly-skilled and difficult-to-reach population ($100.00 payments per clinician). MHPs were recruited through Qualtrics panel services by disseminating the survey to individuals who previously indicated that they provided mental healthcare as a counselor, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, social worker, etc. At the start of the survey, participants indicated which field best represented their profession. To be eligible to continue participating, individuals needed to select the response option labeled ‘Mental Health: counselors, clinicians, therapists, psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers, etc.’ Individuals indicating other professions were funneled out of the survey. Lay participants were recruited through CloudResearch. Like MTurk, Cloudresearch is an online participant platform that allows interested individuals to participate in research in exchange for monetary compensation. Among lay participants, 176 identified as White, 4 as American Indian or Alaska Native, 12 as Asian, 46 as Black or African American, 14 as Latina/o, 4 as Multi-racial, 1 participant identified as Hawaiian or Pacific Islander and 1 participant did not disclose their race (164 female; 93 male; 1 did not disclose; Mage = 43.29, SD = 17.61). Among MHPs, 112 identified as White, 4 as American Indian or Alaska Native, 23 as Asian, 6 as Black or African American, 9 as Latina/o, 3 as Multi-Racial, 3 participants did not disclose their race (41 female; 119 male; Mage = 47.59, SD = 13.99). Here we would note that although detailed demographics for MHPs were cut to conform to the contracted study duration with Qualtrics, soft launch data from the first 30 MHPs indicated participants held advanced healthcare degrees (e.g., Ph.D., M.D.) with at least five years of clinical practice (range = 5–36 years of clinical experience). Of the total sample of 418, 139 participants were excluded for failing the study’s attention check or for presenting a duplicate IP address that could indicate bot-responding (npublic = 100; nMHP = 39). After exclusions, the study achieved an analyzable sample of 262 (npublic = 152; nMHP = 110). Sensitivity analysis suggests this sample provided 80% power (α =.05) to detect an interaction between participants’ background and target race as small as d =.34. Materials. Using the task from Studies 2a-b, participants made judgments of psychological distress and treatment needs. However, to account for greater nuance in treatment recommendations, the treatment scale was expanded. Units 1–26 were on an interval scale 1 (0 sessions), 2 (1 session)…26(25 sessions); options 27 (26–52 sessions) and 28 (52+ sessions) encompassed greater amounts of therapy sessions. Procedure. Following consent, participants completed the distress and treatment task for Black and White targets. After completing demographic items, participants were debriefed, thanked, and compensated for their time. Results We conducted a mixed-model ANOVA where participant background (public/MHP) was entered as a between-subjects factor and distress judgments corresponding to target race (Black/White) were entered as a within-subjects factor. Results of this analysis yielded a significant main effect of target race, F(1, 260) = 12.39, p =.001, =.045, such that Black targets (M = 4.44, SD = 1.43) were judged to experience less psychological distress than White targets (M = 4.54, SD = 1.39). Neither the main effect of background, F(1, 260) = 1.22, p =.270, nor the interaction between background and target race, F(1,260) = 1.95, p =.16 reached significance. Turning to treatment judgments, we again conducted a mixed-model ANOVA with participant background (public/MHP) as a between-subjects factor and target race as a within-subjects factor. Results of this analysis produced a significant main effect of target race, F(1, 260) = 10.90, p =.001, =.040 and a significant interaction between target race and participant background, F(1, 260) = 6.50, p =.011, =.024. The main effect of participant background fell short of significance, F(1, 260) = 3.29, p =.071, =.013. To decompose this interaction, we first conducted paired samples t-tests for treatment judgments for Black and White targets separated by participant background. Lay participants again judged Black targets (M = 11.69, SD = 7.91) to need less treatment than White targets (M = 12.21, SD = 7.93), t(151) = -4.09, p <.001, 95% CI[-.77, -.27], d = 0.33. However, MHPs did not differ in their treatment judgments between Black and White targets, t(109) = -.58, p =.56, 95% CI[-.29,.16], d = 0.06. Additional independent samples t-tests analyzed the effect of background (public/MHP) on treatment for Black and White targets separately. These tests found that although members of the public (M = 11.69, SD = 7.01) judged Black targets to require significantly less treatment than MHPs (M = 13.57, SD = 6.51; t[255.58] = -2.11, p =.036, 95% CI [-3.64, -.12], d = 0.26), judgments for White targets did not significantly differ between lay participants and MHPs t(257.91) = -1.63, p =.11, 95% CI[-3.15,.30], d = 0.20. As outlined in our pre-registration, using the MEMORE macro (Montoya & Hayes, 2017), we tested whether target race had an indirect effect on treatment judgments via racial biases in psychological distress. Mediation analyses were conducted separately for lay participants and MHPs. Among lay participants, race’s effect on treatment outcomes was mediated by biased judgments of psychological distress, b = -.37 SE =.09, 95% CI [-.54, -.13]. However, analysis among MHPs revealed that target race’s indirect effect on treatment recommendations via distress judgments did not reach significance, b = -.14 SE =.07, 95% CI [-.28,.01]. Suspecting that power prevented the pre-registered mediation analysis from achieving significance, we performed an exploratory mediation analysis on the full sample of MHPs (i.e., including MHPs that failed the study’s attention check; n = 39). Before conducting this analysis, we first tested whether responses differed between MHPs that passed v. failed the attention check and whether attention check responses interacted with judgments of distress and treatment. Results of these analyses revealed that MHPs provided similar responses whether they passed or failed the attention check, Fs< 1.00, ps>.36 and attention checks did not interact with effects of target race, Fs <1.00, ps>.75. Bolstered by these results, we tested whether distress judgments mediated race’s effect on treatment judgments for the full sample of MHPs (Fig 3). Results of this analysis provided evidence that among MHPs, racial biases in distress mediated target race’s effects on treatment judgments, b = -.17 SE =.07, 95% CI [-.32, -.04]. Discussion These results provide further evidence that the public believes psychopathology harms Black individuals less than White individuals and, consequently, believe Black individuals have weaker treatment needs than White individuals. Critically, the current study provides suggestive evidence that these biases extend to practicing MHPs. Like members of the lay public, MHPs judged Black targets to experience less psychopathology-related distress than White targets and—when analyzing data from all available MHPs—these biased judgments mediated target race’s effect on treatment judgments. Although the direct effect of target race was not significant, exploratory analysis of all sampled MHPs revealed that race operated through racially-biased distress judgments to inform treatment recommendations. This exploratory analysis provides evidence that racial biases in judged distress generalize to MHPs and indirectly affect treatment judgments. General discussion Recognizing distress is critical to mental healthcare. The mental health needs of Black Americans are particularly pertinent when considering the tolls of the COVID-19 pandemic and ongoing violence and harassment directed at Black Americans. Yet, at a time when Black Americans face multiple mental health crises, it appears that many in society—including some working in mental healthcare—paradoxically believe psychopathology hurts Black individuals less than White individuals. Evidence from four studies provide consistent evidence for this racial bias in mental health judgments. Lay participants and MHPs similarly believed that mental illness was less distressing to Black individuals than White individuals. Moreover, among lay participants, biased distress judgments mediated similar racial biases in care recommendations for Black relative to White individuals. Among MHPs, racially-biased distress judgments indirectly informed judgments of treatment needs. Although care should be taken when interpreting effects among MHPs, exploratory analysis of the complete sample suggests that racial biases in distress extend to practicing clinicians and indirectly influence treatment judgments for Black and White individuals. Implications The current results make several key contributions. First, racially-biased judgments of psychological distress bear directly on the mental health crisis facing Black Americans. At a time when suicide rates and mental health needs are rising among Black Americans, portions of the public and MHPs paradoxically believe that psychopathology hurts Black individuals less than White individuals. Racial bias in distress judgments is directly relevant to the mental health challenges faced by Black Americans. Second, racial biases in distress judgments represent a novel theoretical mechanism for understanding racial disparities in mental healthcare. Because judgments of distress are essential to every step of the treatment, racial disparities in psychological distress judgments stand to have numerous negative effects across the treatment process (e.g., assessment, symptom tracking, rapport building, care quality). Racial biases in distress judgments may contaminate numerous stages of mental healthcare. Third, the minimization of Black individuals’ psychological distress and treatment needs advances research on pain biases to chronic and extreme mental health conditions. These findings illustrate that race’s effect on judgments of social hurts are not relegated to common everyday slights, but extend to judgments of highly distressing experiences and crucial mental health needs. By documenting race’s effect on mental health judgments, these results advance research on biases in pain judgments generally and research on social pain biases specifically. Fourth, racially-biased mental health judgments may affect multiple life contexts. At work and in school, authorities often have wide latitude for providing time off, excused absences, and deadline extensions. Widely held beliefs that minimize the psychological distress and mental health needs for Black individuals stand to undermine accommodations and support in numerous interpersonal contexts. Finally, racial biases in mental health and treatment needs have negative implications for interventions and programming to ameliorate racial disparities in mental health. Perceived need fuels funding priorities in both the public and private sector. Consequently, racial biases that undermine conceptions of the psychological distress and mental health needs of Black Americans may negatively affect government and philanthropic resources directed toward Black mental health. Limitations and future directions Limitations offer avenues for future research. Although the current research offers compelling initial evidence for a race-based bias in psychological distress and consequent treatment judgments, caution should be exercised when extrapolating these experimental results to the population writ large and the diverse field of mental healthcare professionals. Among laypeople, although the consistent replication of distress and treatment judgments provides evidence of the generality of this bias, replication among a nationally representative sample of American adults would provide even greater support for the durability of these effects. Among clinicians, more detailed replication, particularly with larger and more diverse samples with ecologically richer stimuli would provide greater understanding of the effect of client race on MHPs’ judgments of distress and treatment. First, larger samples affording greater statistical power will provide greater evidence of the reproducibility of Study 3’s effects among MHPs. Second, future research should test the role of clinician race and training orientation to potentially moderate distress and treatment judgments. Although there is some evidence from research on physical and social pain judgments that Black and White individuals often show similar biases, presumably because of the nominally positive nature of stereotypes related to Black strength and resilience, it is not clear whether these effects generalize to Black clinicians and those trained in more culturally competent approaches to mental health. Future research should test for moderators among MHPs. Third, researchers might test how client race shapes distress judgments in more ecologically valid contexts. For example, guided by methods for testing social accuracy in emotion perception, stimuli could be created in which actual Black and White clients report their distress before and during structured clinical interviews. Segments of these interviews could then be presented to novel clinician participants tasked with judging clients’ distress at focal interview moments. To the extent that Black and White clients have moments of low and high distress and these experiences can be matched across target client race (e.g., segment trials in which Black and White clients indicate feeling a distress level of “5” on 7-point Likert scale), this procedure would allow researchers to manipulate target race while holding client distress and personal characteristics constant (see also for rigorous procedures using computer generated stimuli). Additionally, such a procedure would allow researchers to not only test whether MHPs minimize Black clients’ distress relative to White clients’ distress, it would also afford tests of whether they underestimate Black clients’ distress relative to the clients’ actual emotions. Although resource and labor intensive, replicating Study 3’s effects using such ecologically rich stimuli would provide even stronger evidence that race biases clinicians’ judgments of Black clients’ distress. In sum, although the current results offer initial evidence that laypeople and MHPs minimize the distress of psychopathology for Black relative to White individuals, care should be taken when extrapolating these findings to the broad field of mental health. Future research would provide greater support for these findings by testing effects with bigger and more diverse samples and with even richer experimental stimuli. Just as pressing, future research must also investigate mechanisms to eliminate racial biases in mental health and treatment needs. Considering evidence that mindfulness and perspective-taking sometimes spotlight the harms of discrimination and racial inequity, strategies geared at improving perspective-taking and mindfulness may mitigate biased distress and treatment judgments. Another limitation of the current work is its exclusive use of male target individuals. Although there is evidence that racial biases in social pain judgments occur for Black female and Black male target individuals and clinicians under-diagnose certain forms of psychopathology (e.g., eating disorders) for Black female relative to White female clients, other social cognitive work highlights that race is sometimes gendered, producing unique biases toward Black female targets. Future research should test whether target race and gender produce independent or interactive effects on judgments of psychological distress and treatment recommendations. Future research should also test whether racially-biased distress judgments affect the therapy strategies MHPs provide Black clients. There is evidence that clinicians are less likely to use cognitive change strategies with Black versus White clients. To the extent that cognitive change strategies are critical to care, providing less of this “ingredient” may dilute therapy’s effectiveness for Black clients. Future research should examine whether clinicians’ racial biases in distress judgments shape therapy decisions, retention, and care outcomes. Finally, future research might also explore how biases in psychological distress are shaped by other group identities. For example, other social groups are judged as tough and insensitive to pain (e.g., low-SES individuals ), have their emotional capacities dehumanized (e.g., larger-bodied individuals ), and feel their social hurts are invalidated (e.g., East/South-East Asian, Asian-American, Indigenous, and Latine individuals ). Future research should test whether biases in mental health and treatment needs extend to individuals from diverse social backgrounds. Conclusions At a time when Black Americans’ mental health needs are pressing, the current work provides consistent evidence for a racial bias in mental health and treatment judgments. Members of the public and practicing mental healthcare providers believed psychopathology harms Black individuals less than White individuals and these distress biases informed treatment judgments. These biases represent a social-cognitive obstacle to achieving mental healthcare equity and require urgent address to meet the critical needs of Black Americans. Introduction Stereotyping is a cognitive process by which a specific set of attributes and beliefs is associated to a social group. Stereotypes are embedded within cultural systems and deeply impact how people interact with each other. They are learned and reinforced by numerous processes. They develop early in life, partly through associative learning processes, so that even young children easily learn social stereotypes based on features that are salient for categorization such as gender, age, race or physical attractiveness. If on one hand a key role is played by the influence and interactions with parents, friends and peer groups, the impact of media in the formation and maintenance of cultural stereotypes and prejudicial feelings toward out-groups seems to be preponderant. Several studies demonstrated that mainstream media has historically marginalized and underrepresented minority groups. For instance, researchers have suggested that the negative representation of African Americans and Latinos as criminal, aggressive and unintelligent in the media help reinforce hostile prejudice against these social groups. Moreover, media representations have a strong impact on identity management strategies. Saleem et al. revealed that Muslim American students who viewed negative media representations of their religious group were less likely to desire acceptance by other Americans and more likely to avoid interactions with majority members. Overall, stereotypes are often embedded in the cultural system people are immersed in and are shared within a given culture. Once established, stereotypes become hard to deconstruct and they can influence people’s lives in a variety of ways, shaping attitudes (prejudice) and behaviours (discrimination), influencing for instance academic performance, career choices and salary gap. Researchers have developed several techniques to improve attitudes toward outgroups that have been found to be effective. Kawakami and colleagues found that students who practiced responding in nonstereotypical ways to members of other groups became better able to avoid activating their negative stereotypes on future occasions. Moreover, when people are exposed to or are invited to think about counterstereotypic persons, for instance strong women or Black role models, they became less prejudicial towards that social group. Allport provided one of the first contributions in understanding what are the conditions that allow stereotypes to be modulated and prejudices to be reduced in the publication "The nature of prejudice". He formulated the "Contact Hypothesis", according to which to reduce prejudices and hostilities it is best to encourage contact between members of different groups. Allport additionally identified a series of conditions to be met so that contact can produce positive effects (e.g., Equality of status, Social and institutional support, Pleasant contact and Intergroup cooperation in order to achieve a common goal). Following this line of thoughts, if on the one hand the media can reinforce certain prejudices and stereotypes, on the other they can be used as educational tool that can raise awareness and influence attitudes towards members of different social groups to reduce intergroup prejudices. For example, Ramasubramanian and colleagues showed that activation of implicit racial stereotypes decreased when people were exposed to news stories disconfirming stereotypes and that there are media-based strategies to reduce accessibility to stereotypes. Also Soble and colleagues showed that a short video could modify the racial attitudes of white college students towards peers of colour. In the experimental design students were assigned to two experimental groups: one group viewed a short documentary depicting the life of a Caucasian and an Afro American subject, followed by hidden cameras over the course of a day, the other group did not view any video. The authors found that the experimental group presented reduced prejudicial attitudes and reduced fear of minorities compared to the control group as assessed by the Color-Blind Racial Attitudes Scale (CoBRAS; ), the Psychosocial Costs of Racism to Whites scale (PCRW; ), and the Quick Discrimination Index (QDI; ). Because stereotypes often operate out of awareness, social psychologists and neuroscientists have developed methods for assessing them indirectly. Research using implicit measures suggest that stereotypes and prejudices are easily activated when we encounter members of different social groups. To overcome issues related to social desirability, researchers have effectively studied the implicit activation of stereotypes at the brain level by means of EEG/ERPs. Several studies have shown that ERPs are sensitive to violations of race- and gender-based stereotypes. Specific attention has been paid to the N400 response, a negative deflection of the ERPs peaking around 400 ms, that indexes a difficulty in accessing and integrating incoming semantically incongruent information with previous knowledge. Indeed, researchers discovered that lexical-semantic knowledge and general knowledge about the world were both integrated in mental representations in the same time interval during sentence comprehension (about 300 ms from stimulus presentation; ). Furthermore, the N400 response was found effective to explore the activation of conceptual/semantic associations related to world knowledge such as stereotypes using both visual or written stimuli. For instance, Hehman and colleagues argued that the N400 component could be considered an index of stereotype accessibility. The authors used a prime-target paradigm and measured a greater N400 reactivity in response to trials in which the prime (face: Black/White) was incongruent with the stereotypical target (trait: positive/negative) than when primes and targets matched. Similarly, Wang et al. found that the N400 amplitude was modulated by the congruent or incongruent association of stereotypical traits to pictures of Chinese rural workers or city dwellers. In the context of social stereotypes the N400 response might therefore index the detection of information not corresponding to available world knowledge, including social attributes stereotypically associate to a social or ethnic group. In the realm of gender stereotypes, Proverbio and collaborators also used ERPs to measure, by means of a N400 response, the detection of a discrepancy between gender-based occupational stereotypes and non-stereotypical written material. According to the authors using complete and meaningful sentences allowed participants to access and shape more easily mental representations and to form impressions according to their own experiences. Adapting the same paradigm of Proverbio et al. to the study of race-based stereotypes, Brusa and colleagues also found a greater N400 negativity in response to words violating ethnic stereotypes, compared to words that confirmed them or were neutral in this regard. Moreover, the amplitude of the N400 response was found to be sensitive to several experimental manipulations. For instance, smaller amplitudes were recorded when the incoming information was more expected and therefore easier to process. Since sentence comprehension occurs accounting for one’s knowledge, context and expectations deriving from prior knowledge can influence the processing of incoming information from the earliest stages. Indeed, sentence comprehension can be facilitated when the right context is provided. For instance, Hald and colleagues investigated with ERPs the modulation of world knowledge comprehension by providing context. The authors found that when world knowledge incongruities (e.g. The city Venice has many roundabouts and beautiful buildings) were preceded by local context that made violations more acceptable (e.g., The large and increasing amount of cyclists in the inner city of Venice had to be regulated. The city council decided 10 years ago to replace traffic lights with other road layouts that ease traffic flow) the N400 was reduced compared to when the current discourse context accentuated the violation. The results fostered the claim that local discourse can modulate the integration of world knowledge information retrieved from memory. Also Duffy and Keir investigated the effect of discourse context on processing of gender stereotypes during reading. After providing adequate disambiguating context, the effect of longer reading times in response to stereotype anomalies disappeared. The modulation of the N400 effect by providing media-based context information was studied also by Jin and colleagues. The authors explored the role of the media in emphasizing racial stereotypes, as reflected by the N400 effect. In particular, the authors studied the attitude of Han Chinese towards the Uygur minority using ERPs as an index of the cognitive and neural processes associated with the activation of stereotypes. The participants, all of Han ethnicity, were subdivided into two experimental groups: a priming group viewed a video that portrayed negative aspects of the Uygur group; while the control group didn’t watch any video. The paradigm consisted in the vision of unknown faces belonging to either the Han or Uygur ethnicity followed by a lexical decision task of positive or negative words, while recording EEG signal. The results showed that the priming group, who observed the video, unlike the control group, showed a greater N400 amplitude in response to positive adjectives associated with the presentation of Uygur faces compared to when the same faces were associated with negative adjectives. The results demonstrated that negative media information might influence people judgments toward other groups and this effect is reflected in the deflection of the N400 amplitude. As seen so far, previous literature has demonstrated that providing local context that is able to modulate expectation on the upcoming information and therefore facilitate the integration of semantic and social incongruities can modulate the N400 effect. When considering social stereotypes, only few studies have investigated the role of local context on the N400. Indeed, the study by Jin and colleagues demonstrated that local context provided in the form of media-driven information is able to play an influence on attitudes towards social groups modulating the N400 response. While their study showed that negative media driven information towards a social group can increase the N400 effect when associating the same social group to positive attributes, there aren’t studies to our knowledge that have explored whether associating visual positive information to a social group could in turn reduce the N400 effect. Unlike the previously used paradigms, the emphasis here was on the possibility to measure a change in the representation of social attributes, due to the incoming of newly acquired knowledge. In other words, through the N400 paradigm we aimed at investigating whether it was possible to change mental ethnic stereotypes, by measuring their mutable effects, rather than just assessing their presence. The paradigm used in the present study was similar to the one used by Brusa et al. with sentences that could either violate (incongruent), non-violate (congruent) or be neutral with regard to stereotypical concepts concerning non-Caucasian ethnic groups. While our previous study allowed to implicitly access the neural representation of ethnic stereotypes avoiding the activation of control processes related to social desirability pressure, here the investigation aimed to confirm previous results and further explore, by means of EEG/ERPs technique, whether the previous exposure to positive and progressive social information about other-race members (e.g. Arabs, Africans, Asians, South Americans) in the form of a video documentary could modulate, in a group of Italian Caucasian participants, the access of such stereotypical representation, thus the detection of stereotypes incongruences in the subsequent sentence reading task, as marked by the N400 response. It was hypothesized that, unlike participants in the control group who were exposed to a neutral video on flora and fauna, the participants exposed to the experimental video representing other-race individuals associated to positive attributes (e.g. a Muslim activist marching for human rights or a Black Boeing’s pilot), would present a smaller N400 effect in response to sentences that violated stereotypical assumptions compared to congruent and neutral sentences. Based on studies on the influence of context on the N400 effect and the power of media to modulate stereotypical mental representation, it was hypothesized that watching a documentary could update, even if only temporarily, one’s knowledge about the social world modulating their expectations, as revealed by the N400 effect. As previously seen in several studies, the neural generators of the N400 response elicited by the violation of social stereotypes were hypothesized to reside in cortical structures that are involved in semantic knowledge and in brain regions connected to social cognition processes, such as the representation of social groups (e.g. ethnic groups), impression formation and processing and retrieval of information about other people. Indeed, the representation of stereotypes seems to be accompanied by the activation of some brain areas involved in mnemonic processes, in particular the temporal lobe (lateral and anterior) and the inferior frontal gyrus, and of areas belonging to the social cognition network, as the middle prefrontal cortex, the temporo/parietal junction, the superior temporal sulcus and the anterior temporal cortex. Based on the previous literature we expected that the neural sources best explaining stereotype-dependent N400 potentials would involve regions of the social brain. The literature has especially highlighted the role of the right superior/medial frontal gyrus (SFG; BA 8) in representing social attributes and stereotypes. While the typical semantic N400 response (which appears focused at centro/parietal scalp sites) seems to reflect mostly the activity of the anterior medial temporal lobe (AMTL), we hypothesized that the present anterior N400 would tap at social brain areas. Indeed N400 violations were not semantic in nature but purely based on ingroup/outgroup social categorizations. The present findings will get further new lights on the cortical dynamics of social knowledge. Moreover, as evidenced in our previous study, the present study aimed to investigate post-N400 positivities related to congruence and language prediction. Regardless of the group assigned, a P300 effect was expected to be found in response to sentences congruent with ethnic bias compared to incongruent and neutral ones, as already found in the previous study by Brusa and colleagues. The P300 response, an index of contextual updating, has been shown to reflect the integration into mental representations of semantic information that was anticipated during sentence reading and would fit the hypothesis that biased mental representations were more easily expected in the group of participants. Furthermore, also replicating the results of our previous study, a late frontal positivity was expected to be found in both groups in response to sentences involving other-race individuals compared to own-race, neutral, characters. Indeed, the late positivity is a component sensitive to the emotional value of a stimulus and is commonly found in response to emotionally relevant and arousing stimuli compared to neutral ones. For instance, Cuthbert and colleague revealed that emotionally arousing pictures evoked a larger positive amplitude compared to neutral ones, while Schacht and Sommer, investigating the emotional influence on visual word processing, found a late ERP effect related to emotional (positive and negative) words processing compared to neutral ones. It was hypothesized here that sentences referring to OR individuals with either a stereotypical or counter-stereotypical content would be more emotionally relevant (thus evoking a larger frontal positivity) than own-race/neutral sentences. Materials and methods Participants Forty (22 females, 18 males) volunteers aged between 18 and 35 years (M = 22.75, SD = 2.68) and ranging in education from 12 to 18 years of study (M = 16.15, SD = 1.46), participated in the experiment. Participants were randomly assigned to but demographically balanced across two experimental groups. The data from 4 participants were discarded for excessive recording artifacts. The final EEG data analyses therefore included thirty-six (n = 36) participants, of whom 18 (age = 22.59, SD = 2) belonging to the experimental group “People” and 18 (age = 22.50, SD = 3.29) to the control group “Nature”. To avoid cultural differences, all volunteers were Italian by birth, Caucasian and with both Italian biological parents. They had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, were right handed as assessed by the Oldfield Inventory (; M = 0.89, SD = 0.14) and reported no history of drug abuse or neurological or mental disorders. Subjects were recruited through the Sona-System University portal and were granted university credits in exchange for their participation. At the end of the experiment, participants were administered an adapted version of the Pettigrew and Meertens’ Subtle and Blatant Prejudice Scale (see for the Italian translation), to assess the presence of racial bias towards immigrants. Response to the questionnaire were provided on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from ‘Not at all’ to ‘Very much’ according to the agreement with the statements presented. All the participants expressed their understanding and written consent for the study according to the Declaration of Helsinki (BMJ 1991; 302: 1194), with approval from the University Ethics Committee (prot. n° RM-2019-178). Participants were informed of the general characteristics of the study (which was defined as an ERP study on reading). However, information about the study’s hypotheses were only provided at the end of the experiment, minimizing the social desirability bias. Stimuli for the video manipulation Prior to the EEG recording involving the language task, each subject, according to the experimental group assigned, was presented with one of two video documentaries, created ad hoc for the study using PowerPoint. The two documentaries were comparable in the format, differing from each other only for the image content. They were featured the presentation of 95 colourful and copyright free-images, collected from the web. Each video lasted about 10 minutes (9’42”) and was musically accompanied by a romantic piano piece (Debussy -Arabesque N° 1 -Arabesque N° 2 -Clair De Lune). The documentary presented to the experimental group (named “People of the world”) showed images depicting the lives of multiple subjects belonging to various ethnic groups (e.g. Arabs, Afro-Americans, Roma) portrayed in situations and contexts violating discriminatory stereotypes (for instance, a female Afro-American astronaut at flight controls, a Muslim human rights activist during a protest, two Afro-American Airline pilots, an Arab woman wearing the hijab doing medical research, etc.). This type of “inverted bias” conformed to what was described in the incongruent sentences of the subsequent sentence reading task during EEG recording. The control group viewed a documentary (named “Nature of the world”) showing images depicting beautiful natural landscapes and different animal species, excluding human beings and their modified landscapes (for instance, a fjord landscape, two rabbits in a meadow, a seaside landscape, a goat climbing on alpine rocks, desert dunes, etc.). Procedure for the video manipulation This manipulation occurred 20 minutes prior EEG recording. The video-documentaries were presented in free vision on a TV monitor placed at a distance of 100 cm, while people were comfortably seated and in the absence of any EEG recording at this stage. To monitor participants’ attention while watching the documentary, they were instructed to watch the documentary attentively, because the content of the documentary would have been object of specific questions in a subsequent memory task, administered at the end of the video presentation. At this purpose, a paper and pencil questionnaire involving the mnemonic recall of some of the viewed content, based on 4 YES/NO questions (Table 1), was employed. Stimuli for the language task The linguistic task performed during EEG recording involved the reading of 285 sentences belonging to three experimental conditions based on their congruency in relation to typical ethnic stereotypes present in the Italian culture. The ethnic groups considered were various (Eastern Europeans, Arabs, Africans, Asians, South Americans, Roma) and were balanced between conditions. The Congruent condition included 95 sentences that confirmed ethnic stereotypes, such as “Naadir is the leader of a group of REBELS” (in Italian “Naadir è a capo di un gruppo di RIBELLI”); The Incongruent condition included 95 sentences that violated stereotypes expressing notions deviating from common prejudice; e.g., ‘‘Mustafa is part of a group of ALPINISTS” (in Italian: “Mustafa fa parte di un gruppo di ALPINISTI”); The Neutral condition included 95 sentences that expressed neutral concepts relative to Italian characters; e.g., “Mirco attends a group of ACTORS” (in Italian: “Mirco frequenta un gruppo di ATTORI”). Sentences were created in a way so that the congruency with the prejudice was made explicit only at the very end by the terminal word. Moreover, 24 extra sentences sharing the syntactic, semantic and lexical characteristics with the previous sentences acted as target stimuli. They all ended with an animal name as the terminal word (e.g. “That man was assaulted by a TIGER”, in Italian: “Quel signore è stato assalito dalla TIGRE”) for the fictitious experimental task. The stimuli have been previously employed in another study by the present research group and contextually balanced syntactically, semantically, lexically across conditions and validated in respect to common sense prejudices for the specific population (University students in the Milan metropolitan area). For ERP averaging of all stimulus types, EEG epochs were time-locked to the terminal words. Procedure for the language task Participants were blindly and randomly assigned to either the experimental (“People”) or the control (“Nature”) group by the researchers, preserving demographical balance across groups. Regardless of the group assigned, participants underwent the identical procedure that differed only for the documentary previously presented. After positioning the EEG headset, participants were invited to seat in an electrically and acoustically shielded cubicle at 100 cm from a PC screen and were asked to fixate its centre where a dot served as fixation point. The experimental procedure involved two distinct subsequent sessions: the viewing of the documentary followed by the mnemonic recall questionnaire (without EEG recording) and the sentence reading task (with EEG recording). In the first session, participants were provided written instructions that invited them to attentively watch the video documentary and later to answer a questionnaire. The documentary was presented on a PC screen using Quicktime Player and background music was reproduced through a pair of Sennheiser (202HD model) headphones. At the end of the presentation, the brief mnemonic questionnaire was provided (Table 1) and answers were collected to assess the attentive state of participants. In the second session, where EEG signal was recorded during the sentence reading task, participants were instructed to sit relaxed but still, avoiding any head or body movements as well as ocular saccades and blinks. Sentences were presented with Eevoke v2.2 (ANT Neuro, Hengelo, The Netherlands) in a randomized order across 8 sequences of 2 min and 40 s each interspersed with a 30-s pause. Each sentence was presented for 1000 ms at the centre of the screen arranged in a maximum of three short rows and followed, after an ISI of 700 ms, by the terminal word which was presented for 1000 ms in uppercase. The ITI was 1200 ms. The average size of terminal words was 4.47 cm x 0.8cm, implying a visual angle of 2°33’40” x 2°33’40” (minimum length = 1.5cm, maximum length = 7.9 cm). The text was printed in yellow on a grey background. An example is shown in Fig 1. The fictitious task consisted of responding as quickly and accurately as possible to the terminal word of sentences when it contained an animal name, by pressing a joypad key with the index finger of the right or the left hand. The response hand was alternated across trials. Participants were unaware of the overall study purposes and no judgement about stereotypes was required. Response time to target terminal words was recorded only to control the attentive state and accuracy of participants. Two training runs were administered to participants to allow them to familiarize with the procedure. A longer pause was allowed at about half the recording time. Each experimental sequence started with the presentation of 3 warning signals of 700 ms of duration (‘‘Ready, Set, Go!”) and ended with ‘‘thank you” word on the screen. Both the warnings and thanks were typed in uppercase characters. At the end of the second session, participants were administered the Subtle and Blatant Prejudice Scale. EEG recording and analysis EEG data were recorded using a standard EEG cap with 128 electrodes located according to the 10–5 International System using EEProbe v2.2 software (ANT Neuro, Hengelo, The Netherlands) at a sampling rate of 512 Hz (band-pass 0.016–70 Hz). Horizontal (hEOG) and vertical (vEOG) eye movements were also recorded and linked mastoids served as the reference lead. Electrode impedance was maintained below 5 KOhm. Computerized artefact rejection and manual eye-inspection was performed to remove EEG segments contaminated by ocular artefacts (saccades and blinks), muscle-related potentials, or amplifier blockages. The computerized artefact rejection criterion was a peak-to-peak amplitude exceeding 50 μV. The rejection rate was ~18% in both groups and the average number of trials per condition that went into ERP averaging was 77.58 for congruent, 78.47 for incongruent and 77.86 for neutral. EEG epochs were synchronized with the onset of the terminal word. Evoked response potentials (ERPs) were averaged off-line from 100 ms before to 1000 ms after stimulus onset and an off-line filter (band-pass 0.16–30 Hz) was applied to the ERPs. The mean amplitude area of the N400 response was recorded from anterior, frontal and fronto-central sites (AFz, Fz, FCz) in the 350- to 550-ms temporal window. The mean amplitude area of the P300 was recorded from anterior and fronto-central sites (AFF1, AFF2, AFz, Fz, FCz) in the 500–600-ms time window. The mean amplitude area of the frontal positivity was recorded from anterior-frontal sites (AF3, AF4, AFF1, AFF2, AFz) in the 650–800-ms time window. ERP analyses were performed using EEprobe v2.2 software (ANT Neuro, Hengelo, The Netherlands). The electrode clusters and time windows were selected on the basis of previous literature and on where they matched the strongest scalp recorded activity of N400, P300 and frontal positivity potentials. For each ERP component, the mean area amplitude values were subjected to repeated-measures ANOVAs whose factors of variability were group (“People”, “Nature”), condition (congruent, incongruent, neutral) and electrode (depending on the component of interest). Fisher post-hoc comparisons were used. The effect size for the statistically significant factors was estimated using partial etasquared (ηp2) and the Greenhouse-Geisser correction was applied to account for non-sphericity of the data. All the ANOVAs were performed using Statistica software (version 10) by StatSoft. Behavioural data from the fictitious task and the mnemonic questionnaire were not statistically analysed, but response time and accuracy were collected as a record. A standardized weighted low-resolution electromagnetic tomography (swLORETA; ) was performed on the ERP Difference Wave relative to N400 potentials, computed by subtracting ERP response to Congruent words from ERP response to Incongruent words in the N400 time window, using ASA4 Software. Results Memory task Behavioural data showed that the mnemonic recall of documentary contents was comparable in the two groups. On a total of four questions, the average number of correct responses was 3.61 (SD = 0.70) for the “People” group and 3.55 (SD = 0.62) for the “Nature” group, indicating a good attentive state at the documentary. Language task Participants had an average Response Time (RT) to target terminal words of 625.48 ms (right hand = 627.73 ms; left hand = 625.52 ms). Moreover, the accuracy rate of responses was quite high (hits = 98%), suggesting that participants maintained an elevated attentive state throughout the experiment. Subtle and Blatant Prejudice Scale The prejudice scores towards other race individuals could range from 1 (minimum prejudice) to 5 (maximum prejudice). A single overall prejudice score was computed for the two groups separately averaging all the items of the Subtle and Blatant Prejudice Scale. The mean scores were comparable in the two groups as assessed by the independent-sample t-test (t(34) = 0.40, p = 0.33) and it was 1.99 (SD = 0.35) in the “People” group and 2.04 (SD = 0.44) in the “Nature” group. Moreover, in both groups the average score was significantly lower than the scale midpoint (People: t(17) = -12.31, p <.0001; Nature: t(17) = -9.17, p <.0001), suggesting an overall low racial prejudice towards immigrants in the experimental population, regardless of the group assigned. Considering the explicit and implicit (Blatant and Subtle) scales separately, participants in the “People” group obtained an explicit prejudice score of 1.58 (SD = 0.33) and implicit prejudice score of 2.39 (SD = 0.45), while the “Nature” group scored 1.58 (SD = 0.36) at the explicit prejudice score and 2.49 (SD = 0.59) at the implicit prejudice one. In both groups the explicit prejudice was significantly lower than the implicit prejudice (People: t(17) = -9.44, p <.001; Nature: t(17) = -9.33, p <.001). A summary of results is presented in Table 2 and Fig 2. N400 response (350–550 ms) The ANOVA performed on the N400 amplitude values recorded over the anterior, frontal and fronto-central midline sites (AFz, Fz and FCz) in the 350–550 ms time window, revealed a significant effect of the interaction between group (“People” and “Nature”) and condition (Congruent, Incongruent, Neutral) (F(2, 68) = 3.22, p < 0.05, ηp2 = 0.09). Pairwise comparisons revealed that in the “Nature” group a greater negativity (p = 0.037) was recorded in response to Incongruent (Nature: 2.11 μV, SE = 0.68; People: 1.12 μV, SE = 0.68) than Congruent (Nature: 2.85 μV, SE = 0.76; People: 0.93 μV, SE = 0.76) and also (p = 0.01) comparted to Neutral (Nature: 3.02 μV, SE = 0.78; People: 0.85 μV, SE = 0.78) terminal words, as visible in Figs 3 and 4. A similar effect has not been recorded in the “People” group (respectively p = 0.588 and p = 0.445). P300 response (500–600 ms) The ANOVA performed on the P300 amplitude values, measured between 500 and 600 ms over the anterior-frontal sites (AFF1, AFF2, AFZ, FZ and FCZ) showed a borderline significant main effect of condition (F (2, 68) = 3.14, p = 0.05; ηp2 = 0.08), indicating that the P300 amplitude recorded in response to Congruent terminal words (4.18 μV, SE = 0.51) was overall greater (p = 0.015) than the one measured in response to Neutral terminal words (3.41 μV, SE = 0.53). Moreover, the analysis showed a significant interaction between condition and electrode (F (8, 272) = 4.03, p <0.005; ηp2 = 0.11), regardless of the experimental manipulation. Overall, the P300 amplitude was greater (p < 0.001) in response to Congruent than Incongruent and Neutral terminal words at all electrode sites; in turn the P300 response was larger (p < 0.001) to Incongruent than neutral terminal words at more anterior but not FCZ site (p = 1). P300 mean amplitude values are reported in Table 3 and showed in Figs 4 and 5. Finally, the analysis revealed a significant effect of the electrode (F (4, 136) = 7.17, p <0.001, ηp2 = 0.17), indicating that the P300 response was larger over the electrode FCZ (4.16 μV, SE = 0.50) compared to the electrodes AFF1 (3.59 μV, SE = 0.47; p = 0.001), AFF2 (3.74 μV, SE = 0.46; p = 0.040) and AFZ (3.44 μV, SE = 0.44; p < 0.001). The amplitude recorded over the electrode FZ (3.94 μV, SE = 0.51) was greater than the one recorded over the electrode AFZ (p = 0.008). Frontal positivity (650–800 ms) The ANOVA computed on the mean area values of frontal positivity, measured between 650 and 800 ms over frontal-anterior regions (AF3, AF4, AFF1, AFF2, AFZ) didn’t reveal any difference across the two experimental groups. It showed a significant effect of condition (F (2, 68) = 4.57, p <0.05, ηp2 = 0.17) such that the positivity measured in response to stimuli regarding OR individuals, either Congruent (2.61 μV, SE = 0.37; p = 0.026) or Incongruent (2.77 μV, SE = 0.36; p = 0.006), was greater than the frontal positivity recorded in response to stimuli regarding own-race individuals, that is neutral words (1.97 μV, SE = 0.40). The analysis also revealed a significant effect of electrode (F (4, 136) = 7.30, p <0.01, ηp2 = 0.18), indicating greater positivity recorded over the electrodes AFF1 (2.75 μV, SE = 0.39), AFF2 (2.91 μV, SE = 0.38) and AFZ (2.60 μV, SE = 0.36) compared to the electrodes AF3 (2.09 μV, SE = 0.37; respectively p = 0.004; p <0.001; p = 0.027) and AF4 (1.90 μV, SE = 0.35; respectively p < 0.001; p <0.001; p = 0.003). Results are showed in Figs 4 and 5. swLORETA source reconstruction The swLORETA inverse solution, applied to the Difference Waves obtained by subtracting ERP waveforms elicited by Congruent from that elicited by Incongruent stimuli in the 350–550 ms time window, corresponding to N400 component, showed (Fig 6) that the most active inner sources were the right superior frontal gyrus (SFG; BA 8) and the inferior temporal gyrus (ITG; BA 20). A complete list of all significant electromagnetic dipoles explaining the difference voltages are listed in Table 4. Discussion The present investigation aimed to explore, by means of EEG/ERPs technique, whether the exposure to a video documentary representing positive and counter-stereotypical social information about other-race members could modulate, in a group of Italian Caucasian participants, the activation of implicit stereotypical representations associated to other-race (OR) people in a language task, as indexed by the N400 response. The pool of participants of the study, all with Caucasian background, overtly presented a low prejudice towards OR people as assessed by the Prejudice Scale. Such overall low racial bias presented differences according to the explicitness of the scale used; indeed, the implicit scale revealed slightly higher prejudice scores compared to the explicit one. This result is in line with research that posits that implicit and explicit attitudes can be dissociated. While explicit prejudice shapes deliberative responses which people are able to monitor, implicit attitudes are automatically activated and usually influence responses without a person’s full awareness or control. Therefore, these results highlight the presence, although little and below the scale midpoint, in our participants’ group of an implicit racial bias that probably bypasses explicit learnt equalitarian values. Participants were randomly assigned to two experimental groups and accordingly presented one of two video documentaries for the experimental manipulation. As previously hypothesized, the previous observation of the experimental video documentary was associated to a smaller N400 response, as compared to the control video. Indeed, the results showed that the “People” experimental group, which observed several representations of OR individuals associated to positive social information, presented a smaller N400 effect in response to sentences that violated common racial stereotypes compared to the “Nature” control group. On the other hand, similarly to our previous study, showing how the N400 response signalled the existence of implicit ethnic prejudices, here the N400 response was larger to terminal words that were incongruent with racial stereotypes (compared to congruent and neutral ones) in the control group only witnessing a nature documentary. Therefore, the “Nature” control group, which viewed the neutral video-documentary representing landscapes and animals, showed the typical N400 effect representing the pre-existing representation of race-biased social attributes (prejudices), as it was observed in the previous study. Conversely, the “People” group who observed unbiased social information (progressive documentary) presented a lower N400 amplitude. Although a possible limit of the present study might rely in the absence of a pre-intervention measure of the N400 effect to assert that the reduced N400 amplitude in the experimental group it is truly to ascribe to the experimental manipulation, based on previous literature, it is reasonable to believe that being exposed to the un-biased and counter-stereotypical video documentary played a crucial role in the reduced N400 effect. As well-known the N400 response is an ERP component sensible to the detection of semantic and conceptual incongruities; it reflects the integration of incoming information with pre-existing knowledge and it appears larger when such integration requires an effort due to unexpected content. Several studies showed that when people are faced with information (in the form of images or sentences) that are incongruent with previous conceptual/semantic associations related to world knowledge, such as counter-stereotypical social knowledge, this incongruence is reflected in a greater N400 response. This allowed researchers to assess the presence of implicit stereotypical mental representations in the population, revealing the sensitivity of ERPs as an implicit measure. The present study further investigated whether these deeply grounded mental associations in the form of stereotypes could be modulated and its results are in line with the literature that highlights the role of contextual information in modulating the N400 response. Providing local context can indeed modulate expectations and facilitate the integration of incongruent content into mental representations, thus reducing the N400 effect. Duffy and Keir have shown that offering adequate context to introduce information that are incongruent with gender stereotypes modulated the N400 in response to stereotype violations, possibly facilitating their integration and reducing biased expectations. On the other hand, Jin and colleagues, highlighting the role of media in shaping social attitudes, proved that exposing people to videos that show negative behaviours associated to a minority group (e.g. Uyghurs) can increase biased attitudes towards the same group as showed by a greater N400 effect in response to positive trait (compared to negative trait) associations to that group. The present study explored whether media exposure could also positively shape attitudes towards ethnic minorities, attenuating social bias, using the N400 response as a neural marker of this modulation. Abundant behavioural literature confirmed on one hand the impact of media in the formation and maintenance of stereotypes and prejudicial feelings toward out-groups and on the other hand its ability to disconfirm stereotypes and modify racial attitudes. According to our findings, relying on the influence of context on the N400 effect and the power of media to modulate stereotypical mental representation, we hypothesize that watching the experimental documentary possibly updated participants’ mental representations modulating their expectations, as revealed at a neural level by the reduced N400 effect. While the effect observed was only a between-person effect and it was assessed after a short time (about 20 minutes) occurred between the video manipulation and the language task, future studies should approach the matter applying a within-person effect and eventually enquire the actual duration of such effect in the long-term memory. Moreover, similarly to our previous ERP studies on ethnic and sexual prejudices, the swLORETA computed to reconstruct the neural generators of the N400 response elicited by the violation of ethnic stereotypes in the control group “Nature” identified a networks of cortical structures involved in semantic knowledge and social cognition processes such as the inferior temporal gyrus (ITG; BA 20) and right superior frontal gyrus (SFG; BA 8). This pattern of results fits well with available social neuroscientific literature that posits, indeed, that stereotypical associations reside in regions that underpin semantic memory, such as the anterior and lateral temporal lobes. Moreover, in line with our results, Olson and colleagues proposed that the anterior portion of the inferior temporal gyrus (the anterior temporal lobe, ATL) plays a critical role in representing and retrieving social knowledge, including biographic memory about people and more generally memory for traits and social concepts. This, according to several authors, includes stereotype representations, considered to be social semantic associations. Another powerful source in terms of magnitude was the superior frontal gyrus (BA 8), a region often implicated in the representation of social attributes and theory of mind processes (TOM; ). The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) has been found together with other regions belonging to the social cognition network to be a particularly important structure for the processing of social information. Its activity has been primarily associated with impression formation about other people and mentalizing processes. Interestingly, in a recent study on the neural basis of prejudice, it was also found that the left superior frontal cortex was particularly involved in representing negative prejudices related to others. Another interesting piece of data from the present study revealed, regardless of the group assigned, a greater P300 effect in response to sentences congruent with ethnic bias compared to incongruent and neutral ones, as previously seen also in the study by Brusa and colleagues. The P300 response is an index of contextual updating and has been shown to reflect the integration into mental representations of semantic information that was pre-activated during sentence reading. In line with previous literature, it appears that in the present study Congruent sentences matched participants’ previous knowledge and mental stereotypical representations, thus evoking a greater P300 response. Similarly, a study by Correll and co-authors investigated the properties of the P300 component in a racial bias experiment and demonstrated a greater P300 response in the presence of black armed subjects (compared to White armed ones) due to the automatic association of Black persons and the use of weapons. Here, both the experimental and the control group, showed a greater P300 in response to sentences that matched racial stereotypes compared to the other conditions. It is possible that, while learning through video documentary was able to facilitate the integration of upcoming stereotype-inconsistent content, hence reducing the N400 effect in response to incongruent stimuli, the P300 effect might possibly reflect that in both groups, regardless of the experimental video-manipulation, a terminal word confirmative of the stereotype was pre-activated, thus more expected, during sentence reading. Furthermore, also in line with the results of our previous study on the measuring of implicit stereotypical mental representation, a late frontal positivity was found in both groups to be sensitive to the ethnicity of the characters involved in the sentences. Indeed, a greater frontal positivity was recorded in response to sentences involving other-race individuals, both in a stereotypical and counter-stereotypical way, compared to own-race neutral ones. It is possible to assume that stereotype relevant content involving OR persons might represent for the reader a more emotionally relevant and arousing material compared to neutral content involving individual of the same ethnicity. This finding fits previous literature which suggests that the late positivity is a component sensitive to the emotional and motivational value of a stimulus. It was found in response to emotional and arousing pictures, both positive and negative, or words compared to neutral ones. The arousal hypothesis fits with neuroimaging literature reporting how perception of other- vs. own-race people increases the activity of amygdala, a subcortical structure that reflects arousal triggered by fast unconscious assessment of potential threat. Moreover, in a study by Ito and colleagues on social perception processes a late positive potential marked the evaluative differentiation of racial ingroup and outgroup members. Indeed, several studies have investigated the neural processes underlying ingroup-outgroup discrimination, mainly using face stimuli. For instance, Hart and colleagues showed in an fMRI study that amygdala responses to human face stimuli were affected by the relationship between the perceived ethnicity of the facial stimulus and that of the observer. Moreover, greater fusiform activity has been found in response to faces of one’s own racial group. ERP research examining the N170 component, an index of face encoding, revealed differential processing of ingroup versus outgroup faces, even when groups were defined arbitrarily. Also, the orbitofrontal cortex has been shown to play a broader role in group-based evaluations. In the present study, no significant difference was found between the two experimental groups (lack or presence of bias-free social documentary administration) in the amplitude of frontal positivity. Nonetheless, as visible in Fig 4, the effect appears stronger in the “People” experimental group. It is possible that viewing the experimental documentary depicting hundreds of individuals of OR ethnic groups might influence and increase the ingroup-outgroup discrimination. This claim isn’t supported by precise statistical data but deserves further analyses for reaching a specific conclusion. Overall, it is reasonable that adopting a larger sample size might overcome the possible limitations and strengthen the power of the present research inherent to the relatively small sample size. Conclusions The present study revealed the possibility that N400 effect reflecting pre-existing racial stereotypes, might be modulated and reduced through exposure to positive media-driven information about other race (OR) people. Here, the modulatory effect on the N400 response was tested about 20–40 minutes after the experimental manipulation, so that further follow-up studies should determine its duration in time by testing it after longer periods of time, such as one week or after one month. Moreover, the present results seem to point to a sovramodal interaction in social knowledge, such that a pictorial/filmic experience could modify event related potentials in a stereotype-based language task. Hence, these data possibly suggest that the N400 response may be a sovramodal marker for conceptual incongruence and that social knowledge is also sovramodal in nature.